The words of His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Chile, Sebastián Piñera, at the ceremony of the Raising of the Great National Flag. Santiago, September 17, 2010 Friends, Today, September 17, 2010, when we are just a few hours from commemorating our 200 years of republican life and opening the doors to this third century of independent life, the great Chilean family has gathered here in the Plaza de La Ciudadanía, at the heart of our Republic, to raise and admire together the huge Chilean Bicentennial Flag, which is fluttering magnificently and majestically. In addition to raising this flag, we are raising all the hopes and dreams of Chile, of all the children of our country, of Chile past, present and future, of Bicentennial Chile. This is our flag, the flag of the solitary star, the tricolor flag, the white as white as the majestic mountain that was given as a bastion by the Lord; the blue as blue as our sky and that immense sea that quietly washes your shores; and red, as red as the blood of the proud Araucano, who passed on to us a legacy of courage and also as red as the blood of our heroes and founding fathers, who bequeathed to us the freedom and the Republic in which we coexist today. That is the flag of a united and reconciled Chile. The flagpole, which is over 60 meters tall, is embedded in a place where Chileans meet; at the point where the Avenida Bernardo O’Higgins, the citizen’s avenue, crosses Avenida Bulnes, the Republic avenue. It was placed here so it can be seen and admired from every corner of our city and hopefully too, although only in spirit, from every corner of our country. It is our flag which waves in the wind, great, free, protective, as great, free and protective as we want our country to always be. But the greatness of our flag lies not only in its extraordinary size. It is more about what it represents for the people of Chile, for all Chileans, those of yesterday, today and forevermore. Because this is the same flag before which Bernardo O’Higgins swore to defend our independence and freedom on February 12, 1818, in the city of Talca. It is the same flag for which Arturo Prat gave his life rather than lower it and who sank, together with the Esmeralda ship, that heroic afternoon of May 21, 1879 in the bay of Iquique. It is the same flag that a year later emerged victorious from the depths of the sea, to climb to the top of the Morro de Arica, where it has flown ever since and will wave forevermore. It is the same flag which was sewn, mended and embroidered by the hands of 77 patriots who used their own uniforms and clothing as fabric just hours before sacrificing their lives in the Battle of La Concepción. This flag is kept as a true treasure in our Military Academy. It is the same flag before which generations and generations of our armed forces have sworn to serve our country and even give their own lives if necessary. It is the same flag with which we have covered the coffins of our martyrs so many times. The same flag was rescued and raised up from the dirt and wreckage of Dichato, the morning after the earthquake and tsunami which devastated us on February 27 of this year. The image of that flag inspired all Chileans and gave us strength when we most needed it and that image also traveled around the world as our best ambassador. It is the same flag which, at this very moment, as we are gathered here in the Plaza de La Ciudadanía, is being hoisted up by 33 miners; 33 fellow Chileans, who continue to be trapped 700 meters deep inside a mountain in the Atacama desert. These men symbolize, far more that a thousand words, the unity, mettle, strength and courage of our people. It is the same flag which today flutters in millions and millions of homes, from Visviri to Antarctica, from Easter Island to our police outposts in the Andes Mountains, at our embassies, and of course right now it flutters so majestically before our eyes this afternoon as we celebrate our Bicentennial. It is the flag of our indigenous peoples, the Atacameños, Aymaras, Quechuas, Changos, Chonos, Diaguitas, Huilliches, Alacalufes, Patagones, Yaganes, Rapa-nui and, of course, our Mapuche brothers. It is the flag of thousands of immigrants who have arrived from all over the world, filled with hope, to settle and live in this land, and who today are and feel just as Chilean as all the rest of us. It is the flag that covers and embraces all the sons and daughters of this land, without making any distinction, nor discriminating based on political ideas or religious beliefs, economic situation, ethnic origin or sexual preference. To ensure that this flag never stops flutter, we have decided to promote a bill in Congress which will enable our flag to flutter all the time, not just during the months of our national holiday; and also so it can be hoisted by any citizen and not just by the authorities, throughout Chile and not only at our public buildings, as long as it is done appropriately and with the respect it deserves. Thus, we will see our flag waving at our hospitals, schools, homes, workplaces and parks. And, most important of all, we will see it flutters in the hearts of millions and millions of fellow Chileans now and forevermore. All Chileans, and certainly this President, are aware that we owe a debt to our indigenous peoples and particularly to the Mapuche people, who lived in our lands for thousands of years before the Spanish explorers and conquistadores arrived. It is for this reason, to begin to repay the debt which we have with our indigenous peoples, that our government has developed the Plan Araucanía. This is the most powerful and ambitious initiative to recover lost time and improve the quality of life and the development opportunities of the Mapuche people. We have also promoted a historical reencounter with the Mapuche people in order to value, love, appreciate, protect and develop their identity, language, customs and culture, which are a fundamental and essential part of the identity of our nation. To strengthen these two initiatives, I want to announce today to the country that as soon as the Bicentennial celebrations have finished, next week, a round table will take place at Cerro Ñielol, which is the symbol of La Araucanía. Those attending will include the Government of Chile, represented by the ministers of the Presidency and Planning and Cooperation, the Catholic and Evangelical churches, civil organizations from the Araucanía and Biobío regions, and also representatives of the Mapuche people from the Lafkenche, Pehuenche, Huilliche and Mapuche territories. This round table should enrich the initiatives of the Plan Araucanía and the historical reencounter, so that it can deliver its contributions and ideas before the end of this, our Bicentennial year. Dear fellow Chileans: Beneath this flag, at this moment so full of symbolism, emotion, history and thoughts of the future, I want to send a greeting from the depths of my soul to the more than 17 million Chileans of our generation, the Bicentennial generation, the generation which perhaps, more than any other, faces a challenge with history and a commitment to our country. This will fall to us, those of us who will have the honor, but we will also have the enormous responsibility of finally making come true the dream which our parents, grandparents and great-grandparents longed for but were unable to achieve: making Chile a country without poverty, a developed country, a country with true opportunities for the material and spiritual development of each and every one of its children, something our country has never known. Before this magnificent flag, and when we will soon say goodbye to our second century of independent life, our minds and hearts are also with those who preceded us in the challenge of building the country. Although they are not here in person, their spirit continues more alive than ever, in our customs and traditions, in our institutions and laws, in the ideals and the soul of every Chilean. I think about our indigenous peoples, the founding fathers of our country, the heroes who gave their lives to give our country freedom. Of those who always moved us with their deeds and whose legacy we will never tire of hearing about and repeating. I think also of our school teachers who taught us to read and write. Of our mothers and fathers, from whom we learned to love and pray and who instilled in us our deepest values. I think of our poets, artists and intellectuals, who taught us to love beauty and honor truth. I also think of our miners, agricultural workers and fishermen, who extract for us the riches of land and sea. And I think of so many anonymous heroes, men and women, who, like all human beings, have their virtues and defects, who perhaps are never mentioned in the history books but who nonetheless throughout these two centuries of independent life have done unimaginable things and have not shied away from sacrifice to give their children a better life and to make Chile a better country. Because we never forget that it is because of the efforts, perseverance and generosity of these men and women in our first 200 years of independent life that Chile today enjoys a solid democracy, a consolidated Republic, a prosperous economy, a country of solidarity and a united people who observe the present with confidence and look to the future with hope. Also, at the feet of this huge, protective and generous flag, as we open the doors to the third century of our independent life, as President of Chile, I want to send a message from the bottom of my soul to the millions and millions of Chileans who are not yet with us but who sooner or later will arrive to inhabit and live in this land so blessed by God. To them we say that, although we do not know them, nor even know their names, nor how they will look or what their voices will sound like, we feel that we already love them as though they were here, in our midst, and that that they are present in the heart of every decision we take today and every task we undertake now. Because we are working to build for them a Chile full of opportunities, full of smiles, colors and happiness. A freer, greater and more brotherly Chile. A Chile with equality, a true equality of opportunities. A Chile in which everyone can fight to make their dreams come true and achieve happiness, a task which is embedded in the soul of the destiny and mission of everyone in this world. And I want to say from here, from this Plaza de La Ciudadanía, to you, the Chileans of the future, that today we are sending you the strength for times of adversity and planting seeds, together with the humility for times of triumph and harvest. Because you will have to face moments of adversity, as well as moments of triumph. And in these historic times that we live, which are also times of great opportunities, I am sure that I speak for all of us when I say, with the greatest conviction that the best of Chile is yet to come. That the best of Chile is still in our hands. I am also convinced that this generation, the generation of the Bicentennial, which we have had the privilege of being part of, the same generation which is the heir to Caupolicán, Lautaro, O’Higgins and Carrera, will know how to live up to history and to our challenges and will know how to honor the blood of our heroes. This generation will put all their energy, wisdom and talents toward the great challenge of this decade; which is none other than to make this great leap towards development, which is none other than to defeat the poverty which affects two and a half million fellow Chileans and to make Chile the free, great, fair and fraternal country of which we have always dreamed. For that, Chileans of yesterday, today and forevermore, we join together today at the foot of this noble flag, to clasp one another in a great embrace, an embrace of brothers and sisters, to give thanks to our country, to God and, from the depths of our souls, to shout “Viva Chile!” May God bless our country and may God bless all of our fellow Chileans. Thank you. Viva Chile!