SPEECH BY H.E. MICHELLE BACHELET, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE, AT THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON D.C.  Washington D.C., June 30th, 2014  Dear friends:   It is always a pleasure to return to the United States, which was my home for several years. A home where I learned important lessons and made close friendships.  I thank Brookings and the Institutions that have co-sponsored this meeting.  I am returning to Washington as President of the Republic of Chile, optimistic that we have initiated positive changes for the future of the country and confident that this is a worthwhile task.  In recent decades, Chile has embarked on a successful path of democratic changes. We have significantly reduced poverty and have also strengthened the country’s stability, economic, political and social.   We are internationally recognized as a country with good practices, clear rules and working, and I will say, sound institutions.  This has given us a solid anchor in the fluctuations of the globalized world.  In other words, ours is a steadfast stability; ours is a steady growth. And the basis for this has been the stability of our domestic social, political and economic relations. Above all, our governance is based on identifying and addressing those issues which will lead to a more equal society and dynamic development.	  Today the challenge facing Chile is the elimination of inequality dealing with this will enable us to achieve inclusive and sustainable development and to be counted among the modern developed democracies.  We take up this challenge, not only because it is the right thing to do but also because it is the most intelligent and reliable way of banking on our future: with economic dynamism, political stability and social cohesion.  This challenge requires us to deal with three essential aspects:  -	Tackling inequality, understood as disparity of opportunity, lack of access or discrimination and injustice among citizens.  -	Second, encouraging harmonious, sustainable and inclusive growth.  -	And third, achieving greater civic participation in decisions affecting all Chileans.  In other words, we are not talking about rewriting, but rather about consolidating our history of development and democracy, making improvements and changes where shortcomings still exist.  And this is not only my idea or that of the people who voted for me:  it is a national consensus built up over years.  Although there are legitimate differences regarding the best ways of achieving the transformations – and this is why we have launched a broad national debate – nobody in Chile denies the need for change.  Because, as in most nations on the planet, society itself has changed a great deal in recent years.  Citizens have become more active, more critical, better informed and more demanding.    I would say and more challenging.  Millions of voices in a multitude of languages are calling for societies not to forget in their institutional dealings, in their economic management and in the design of their public policies what should be the focus of any social contract: the people.  Although from the Government’s viewpoint this demand represents a challenge, it is an interesting and important one:  the challenge of ensuring that people are more involved in decision-making on matters that affect them, so that development policies are translated into quality of life, social cohesion and democracy.  For us this means reappraising collective life and public interest, promoting dialogue with a civic sense and a respect for differences.  The challenge of eliminating inequalities has an ethical component, since it refers to a good life for all.   But it also has an economic component.  That is what I say; it is right thing to do, but also smart thing to do.   Because we know that we need dynamic and sustained economic growth in order to tackle inequality, eradicate poverty, create opportunities for development and generate revenue for the implementation of social welfare policies.  And so it is in both senses that Chile has decided to assume and expand the undeniable progress made by the country since the return to democracy, recognizing today´s new challenges and focusing on governance for growth and on stability of democracy.  Around 2020, Chile will have achieved a per capita income similar to that of the developed economies. But we shall not be a truly developed country if we continue to be one of the OECD countries with the highest income inequality.  And this inequality affects our social cohesion and our prospects for economic development.  This is why we must tackle it decisively and, at the same time, opt for inclusion and growth.  Like most Chileans, I am convinced that the biggest risk to the stability and progress of Chile is not making the changes that we need to make. Because inequality undermines one of the most important foundations both of the economy and of democracy: trust.  Trust in the markets.  Trust in institutions and their stability.  Trust in social relations.  And trust is a precious asset which today Chile has decided to enhance, reducing inequality and fostering cooperation between the State, the citizenry and the market.  And this is the underlying meaning of our reforms.  And we are optimistic, because this is the best way of building a better country for all.  We have a strong foundation on which to build.  In recent years, Chile’s economic growth has been positive and unemployment has declined.  This allowed important progress to be made in the expansion of social rights and opportunities for people.  This reflects the global financial scenario, good copper prices in recent years and our monetary and fiscal response to the financial crisis.  These conditions are cyclical and difficult to replicate. When the factors underlying the dynamism of our economy disappear, growth prospects will recede.  Chile is currently experiencing a period of low growth, below its GDP potential, and we must respond to the challenge which this represents.  Chile’s growth for 2014 is estimated at just over 3 per cent.  Starting in 2015, our goal is to resume the steady path of growth and, in the second half of the next administration, for Chile’s growth to be about 5 per cent, at its potential GDP level.  We have set ourselves ambitious goals, but we are taking a realistic approach to these economic conditions facing us.  We need to generate more economic growth, but not growth of any kind.  We need growth that is socially legitimate and inclusive, environmentally sustainable and democratically oriented.  For this, we need to broaden the basis of our development by means of structural reforms. Chilean society, the citizenry and our economy indicate that now is the time to undertake such reforms.  What are the changes that we are proposing and that are already under way? One: a structural reform of education focusing on quality, public education and inclusion;  Two:  stimulation of economic growth and productivity, innovation and competitiveness.  And this obviously involves also tackling the challenges facing us as regards energy.  Three:  tax reform providing ongoing resources for the State and redistributing more equitably the efforts of common development.  It must also lead us back to the path of fiscal responsibility, which is essential if the State is to honor its commitments in the medium and long term.  Four:  a new Constitution, an up to date one, allowing more scope for democracy, participation and guarantees for people in all their diversity.  I would like to refer briefly to all these topics.  Firstly, education, which fosters equity, productivity and democracy.  I’m not gonna say anything that it wins another price here, but Knowledge is essential in order to achieve ongoing prosperity in all these areas.  And to generate this knowledge, countries must make education the focus of their development strategy.  This is what was done by countries that have now achieved development, such as Finland or Japan, Singapore or the United Kingdom.   Chile needs and loudly demands far-reaching change to improve the quality, scope and coverage of education at all levels.  You will undoubtedly recall hearing the news, three years ago, that thousands of students in Santiago issued a structural demand: the right to free and quality education.  There was a time that a lot of young people were on streets over all the world. But something that, I was here working on UN, and everyone asked me, in any meeting: “How do you explain this? Because we understand that in the country who is debating on economy, but you are doing well in economy”, “How do you explain that? You are doing well on economy and still people were demonstrated massively on the streets”.   I had to shield that the students demand was echoed throughout a society anxious to ensure that all children and young people are given not only basic education but also appropriate standards of quality, over and above what a family can pay. I have to tell you, when a country is so, I would say, proud because of all that we enable to build, coming from the dictatorship, to build, sustain and make sure democracy, with good economic performance, where people believe now in short time, we really deserve to have a quality education for all.    Chile has an important task here. Today we are the OECD country ranked as being most dependent on private funding for its higher education: exactly 85.4 per cent.  In Korea, Japan and the United Kingdom, the reliance on family contributions is considerable, but much less than in Chile.  More State investment in education is therefore crucial for a society aiming at equitable and sustainable development.  I know that this also is discussed here in the United States about education and how the students are having it right now.  Chile must remedy the shortcomings of the existing system and provide guarantees of the principles underlying our right to education: integration, universality and quality.  This is why we have initiated this structural reform which is already under way.  Our proposals concern various aspects:  -	Improvement of public education.  -	An end to discriminatory selection of students, an end to profit-making by establishments receiving public funds and an end to copayment by parents in institutions with mixed financing.  In other words, we want families not to have to pay for their children’s education in an establishment receiving State funding.   -	Second, creation of two new State universities. They will be created in two regions of the country where there is not public university.   -	And third, institution-building and improved coverage of pre-school education.  In addition, we are guaranteeing access to college for the most vulnerable students through a special program of access to higher education.  And we are improving technical education throughout Chile, under the auspices of regional universities and with education projects reflecting the economic and productive characteristics of each territory.  What is our goal?  Our goal is to guarantee that all students in Chile without exception can obtain quality education free of charge.  What we really want to is not to lose any all those talents, capacities that people have, and not distributing according to the incomes of the family.   So we need everyone to have the opportunities for a good education and then to contribute the country’s development.   Private providers of education may continue to participate, if they meet quality standards, ban all forms of discrimination and assume the responsibility and the obligations incumbent on a public service.  Of course, the State must play the leading role in both the delivery and regulation of education.  This will produce better informed citizens, promote social mobility, equity and inclusion and allow Chile’s growth to depend not only on its natural resources but also on the knowledge of its people.  And this brings me to another focus of my Government: development of production and competitiveness.  We know that productivity increases slowly in Chile. And we also know that innovation is the main trigger of long-term growth. We must therefore add more knowledge, more complexity and more innovation to our economy and also involve those who are not participating today or are participating below their potential.   We must also diversify our production matrix. In addition to the exploitation of our natural resources, and particularly copper, other production sectors must contribute relatively more to the generation of wealth and economic growth.  In order for this to happen, manpower training is essential.  Accordingly, we have set in motion initiatives to expand the coverage, the contribution to productivity and the relevance of training for work.  Through specialized and targeted plans, we are making a special effort to generate suitable incentives to increase the participation of women and young people in the world of work.  In Chile, these two groups have the lowest rates of participation in the labor market: 54.6 per cent for women and 37.1 per cent for young people.  These figures are respectively 7.7 and 10.3 percentage points below the OECD average.  In addition to investment in human capital, we shall increase investment in science, technology and innovation, offering incentives for their application to the solution of the country’s problems.  We must implement a strategy that takes into account the conditions, strengths and needs of our country.  A strategy based on research and innovation, in which public/private initiative is essential.  In this context, we have announced two powerful programs that go to the heart of economic activity:  The Agenda for Productivity, Innovation and Growth and the Agenda for Energy.  The Agenda for Productivity, Innovation and Growth focuses the development strategy for diversification of the production matrix; inclusion of more people in the labor market; incorporation of new economic sectors in our basket of exports; stimulus of our strategic areas; support for small and medium-size enterprises; and creation of quality public infrastructure.  This extensive agenda includes a series of measures for which the experience of the United States will be very useful to us.  For example, this agenda envisages a national network of Business Development Centers, which will provide comprehensive advice to help small and medium-size enterprises to improve their business models.    And I know that you have Small Business Development Centers, which are our inspiration.  I have to say it, then you can ask for copyright, but now we have to, we are gonna copy it, we just sign it in the government, so don’t worry!  As I said, the Small Development Centers are our inspiration and we are already cooperating in connection with this project.  Well, I’m not gonna describe the whole agenda, it is very big, it is lengthy and available to the public, but I do want to add that we shall also have a system of clusters to support the productive diversification of our economy and the expansion and strengthening of the sectors already consolidated.  Through these actions, we shall finance public goods to buttress significant investment projects, with a focus on sectors with high potential for growth and job creation.  However, while setting new productivity targets, we are also aware that Chile faces considerable energy challenges.  Chile imports 60 per cent of its primary energy.  This means that our country is sensitive to price instability and volatility in the international markets and to supply restrictions.  We must invest in infrastructure and new generation and transmission projects in order to reduce this dependency.  This has not been happening in recent years. And this means that we have not incorporated basic energy that we can use to guarantee a reliable supply in the short and medium term.  We are aware of the urgent need to encourage projects to reduce the energy deficit and we have said that we shall strongly support all initiatives that comply with the rules in force and are a good fit in our regions. In this area too, the State and the private sector must work together.  And this is a key point, because one of the obstacles to the sector’s growth is the lack of “social permits” for some projects.  There are two important challenges here: to strengthen the energy institutional structure and to work to reconcile the interests of local communities with those of the energy generation and transmission projects.  This means working at an early stage, following clear rules, to ensure that the development of these projects is feasible in the medium and long term.  We are therefore working on a plan of territorial development allowing us to decide which projects can be located and where.   We want to see all stockholders together define the areas of development, so we can get in to sum an agreement on this.   However, we also face the challenge of improving competition in the energy market and encouraging new players to enter the market.  On this visit, we hope to be able to study the experience of the United States, from which we have much to learn about gas distribution, renewable non-conventional energies, energy efficiency and good practices.  I want to stress this:  it is urgent for Chile to ensure reliable and efficient energy development at competitive prices but at the same time to use our renewable resources in a sustainable and non-polluting manner.  This is the meaning of our energy agenda:  ensuring that the country will have a diversified, balanced and sustainable energy matrix.  We aim to reduce energy prices, ensuring greater competition, efficiency and diversification in the energy market.  We shall ensure that 45 per cent of the electricity generation capacity that we install between 2014 and 2025 comes from renewable non-conventional energy sources, so that these account for 20 per cent of Chile’s energy matrix within a decade. In addition, we have proposed that energy efficiency should be a State policy, the rule rather than the exception.  Our goal is for us to be able to reduce our consumption by 20 per cent by 2025.  We are talking about efficiency.  Ultimately, the goal of this agenda is to give certainty to all relevant players, to increase predictability, to reassure communities and to introduce clarity into the rules for investors.  Dear friends,  I know that this is an extensive program of change.  However, the point is that Chileans want to implement it while preserving the growth and democracy governance that we have built with considerable effort.  Consequently, our fiscal policy will continue to be guided by the policy of structural balance, because the commitment of new ongoing expenditure must always be linked to ongoing revenue. This is the first responsibility of a State towards its people.  For this reason, in view of the need to undertake a structural reform of education and other social welfare requirements, we shall be implementing a tax reform that will give the State the necessary revenue, on a sustainable basis, equivalent to 3 per cent of GDP.  In addition to providing ongoing revenue, the goal of the reform is also to improve income distribution and tax equity.  In Chile, we have a sad paradox: the gap between the income of the richest and the poorest households is not reduced after payment of taxes. This is a problem that we must solve as a country.  Under this reform, currently going through Congress, those with the highest incomes must make a greater effort to contribute to public revenue.  And this is a well-structured reform, with well-designed incentives, to be introduced gradually.    Some have tried to describe this reform as anti-growth.  I would like to say that, when the developed countries had a per capita income similar to that of Chile today, most of them had tax burdens considerably higher than Chile’s and tax systems that helped to redistribute income.   Those countries developed as they collected higher taxes and provided their citizens with a much higher standard of living.  Chile has room for improvement as regards taxation.  In 2010, Chile’s tax burden was 18.4 per cent and the average was 21.6 per cent for OECD countries which at that time had a per capita GDP similar to that of Chile.  There is no reason why Chile cannot follow the same path. The tax reform that I have described may not please everyone, it doesn’t please anyone I have to say, you don’t have to, but I don’t know; but it is essential if we are to tackle the inequalities and continue to develop.  It should be noted that, the expected effect of the higher taxation on public saving and training of human capital will be more than offset the short-term effects on investment.  Moreover, the income tax increase will have little or no effect on investment. Chile is an active player in international financial markets, with a low level of risk. Thanks to our macroeconomic policies and fiscal soundness, we have a low risk classification at the global level and are the economy with the lowest risk in Latin America.    We have no reason to fear that a tax reform earmarked for investment in human capital would alter our economic development course.  Taxation is only one of the factors affecting investment. And it is far from being the most important one. Studies on the subject conclude that the most important factors for investment are: (1) social cohesion and political stability; (2) the quality and credibility of public institutions; (3)  the accessibility and competitiveness of markets, including financial markets; (4) infrastructure; and (5) appropriate economic legislation.  And in all these areas we are meeting our challenges.  I shall not describe in detail all the tax reforms, but I do wish to say that they have four goals:    1.	To increase the tax burden in order to finance ongoing expenditure with ongoing revenue: the educational reform in which we are engaged, other social welfare policies, and reduction in the structural deficit in fiscal accounts.  2.	To improve income distribution and tax equity.  3.	To introduce new and more efficient ways of encouraging saving and investment.  4.	To implement measures to decrease tax evasion and low pulse. That’s the word, low pulse.   I know that one aspect of this tax reform will be of interest to you: the repeal of Law 600 concerning the Foreign Investment Statute, new investment projects and a tax invariability clause.  This legislation was adopted in 1974, in a very different political, social and economic context, when there was a dictatorship in Chile and our international prestige was at a very low level.  The lack of democracy, lack of freedom and unreliability of our institutions meant that mechanisms such as this were needed in order to encourage foreigners to invest.  After 25 years of democracy, with our solid international prestige, in a context of good governance, democracy and freedom, we no longer need this mechanism to make foreign investors look favorably on the idea of investing in our country.  The institutional stability of our country enables us to take the decision to discontinue this mechanism without affecting foreign investments in Chile.  I would like to share some pictures with you. Sorry, some figures, it will be very nice to share some pictures but I did not some pictures.   Chile has trade agreements with 61 countries. These countries account for 63 per cent of the world’s population and 85 per cent of global GDP. In addition, Chile ranks 34th out of 144 economies in the World Bank’s Doing Business index.  As regards to Chile as a place for doing business, I would like to say that in 2013 our country was among the first 20 economies receiving foreign direct investment; it ranked 18th, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Our foreign policy has also changed, I don’t know if it is a change, but we are also trying to do new emphases, new focuses.  And we are looking at Latin America and the Caribbean as a very important option.  Latin America is our natural space, and from there we shall reach out to the world. We realize that it is a diverse region, but we must respect the different paths to development. Differences are not obstacles to convergences. We believe that Chile can help to build bridges of understanding over and above differences of approach and that, as I have noted on so many occasions, the region presents the most united face possible to the world.  This vision precisely explains our conception of the Pacific Alliance: an economic integration project that does not preclude or oppose other integration schemes. A few days ago in Mexico, I reaffirmed our commitment to the Pacific Alliance.  Similarly, we have promoted convergence and dialogue between the Pacific Alliance and the MERCOSUR countries, without watering down the Alliance’s specificity or its rates of progress.  We shall pay special attention to Latin America and we shall continue to develop our excellent political, economic and cultural relations with our partners in Europe, Pacific Asia and, particularly, North America.   Our relations with the United States are characterized by their solidity, trust and maturity, reflecting important shared principles, values and interest.  We believe in the strength and relevance of democracy and the rule of law; and we defend the rights of individuals and their fundamental freedoms. In addition, we share a common vision of the importance of free trade in ensuring development and stimulating investment and we are working together to create a multilateral trade system based on clear, predictable and transparent rules.  Chile and the United States must move forward in our relationship.  I am sure that, after this visit, new dimensions and areas of understanding will emerge for a new association focused on scientific and technical cooperation, innovation, energy and education, among other things.   Dear friends,  At the outset of this speech, I spoke of the importance of trust in ensuring a country’s development.  This trust also depends on the continuous enhancement and expansion of the democratic rights of the citizens.  This is why I have advocated a new Constitution.  Our existing Constitution dates from 1980 and was adopted in conditions which today nobody could describe as democratic.  Despite the numerous amendments introduced over the past decades, it still has this “deficit of origin”, if I may use this term.  In addition, it contains provisions limiting electoral majorities, allowing minorities to tie with majorities.  This is contrary to one of the basic tenets of any modern State: respect for the voice of the majority and not allowing a few to veto what a nation wants. In addition, this forced tie makes it difficult for the country to democratically resolve its differences.  A fully democratic social covenant is an essential prerequisite for trust in the institutions, trust in the State and trust in politics. And it is essential to a healthy society in which entrepreneurship flourishes and private initiative has certainty and stability for its action.  While we have been laying the foundation for a new Constitution, which is necessarily a lengthy process of dialogue and participation, we have not remained idle.  After more than 20 years of discussion, Chile has abolished a major exclusion: starting with the next presidential elections, Chileans living abroad will be able to vote.  In addition we have drafted legislation reforming our binomial electoral system, which in practice allows a tie between majorities and minorities in terms of legislative representation, replacing it with a proportional system providing for higher levels of competition and representativeness, especially for the smaller parties.   And I shall add, trying also to introduce a balance, a gentle balance on the Parliament. We are very far away from that.    We are adopting this course because we are convinced that the enhancement of democracy is the key to a more solid society. A society anchored in respect for individuality and difference, but which guarantees to each person appropriate standards of respect and wellbeing. And also a society which has legitimate institutional mechanisms for resolving its differences.  It is in this space of respect and trust that collective projects can evolve, linking individual expectations and initiatives with the great dreams of society.  The transformations that I have described here will require time and gradual introduction, so that they can mature with dialogue and democratic participation and can be anchored durably and legitimately in our society and in our institutions. So that they can enjoy the support of a sound economy and legitimate institutions. Many of them will last beyond a government term of office, because we are thinking about development in the long term.  Chile is not a populist country, we know that economic responsibility and democratic legitimacy are the only way to create lasting and equitable wellbeing for each of its citizens.  Dear friends,  At the Solstice, which occurred last week, the indigenous cultures of Chile celebrate the New Year, as is the case in many places.  It is the beginning of a new cycle of collective work, organization and commitment, looking forward to a good harvest. And this is the task on which, in this new cycle, we have embarked as a society.  And, like the seasons, it represents not disruption but the wisdom to recognize the tasks that are fitting for each time.  Thus we shall sow a seed of social capital, cohesion and wellbeing with deep roots, which is the basis of all solid and sustainable development.  I know that the great task on which Chile has embarked in my term of office will last for several calendars but it will be a harbinger of spring, in all its splendor. This is the reason for our optimism and our untiring work.  Thank you very much.  ******  DISCURSO  DE S.E. LA PRESIDENTA DE LA REPÚBLICA, MICHELLE BACHELET EN BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON D.C. (Traducción)  Washington D.C., 30 de junio de 2014   Queridos amigos:   Siempre es un placer regresar a los Estados Unidos, que fue mi hogar por varios años. Un hogar donde aprendí importantes lecciones e hice amistades cercanas.  Agradezco a Brookings y a las instituciones que han co-patrocinado esta reunión.   Regreso a Washington como presidenta de la República de Chile, optimista de que hemos iniciado cambios positivos para el futuro del país y la confianza de que ésta es una tarea que vale la pena.  En las últimas décadas, Chile ha emprendido un camino de éxito en los cambios democráticos. Hemos reducido significativamente la pobreza y también hemos fortalecido la estabilidad del país, económica, política y social.  Somos reconocidos internacionalmente como un país con buenas prácticas, reglas claras y, he de decir, instituciones sólidas de trabajo. Esto nos ha dado un sólido anclaje en las fluctuaciones del mundo globalizado.  En otras palabras, la nuestra es una estabilidad firme; lo nuestro es un crecimiento constante.  Y la base de esto, ha sido la estabilidad de nuestras relaciones sociales, políticas y económicas nacionales. Ante todo, nuestra gobernabilidad se basa en identificar y abordar las cuestiones que conduzcan a una sociedad más igualitaria y el desarrollo dinámico.	  Hoy, el desafío que enfrenta Chile es la eliminación de la desigualdad frente a esto, lo que nos permitirá lograr un desarrollo inclusivo y sostenible y ser considerada entre las democracias modernas y desarrolladas.  Tomamos este desafío, no sólo porque es lo que hay que hacer, sino también porque es la manera más inteligente y confiable de invertir en nuestro futuro: con dinamismo económico, estabilidad política y cohesión social.  Este desafío nos obliga a hacer frente a tres aspectos esenciales:  - Luchar contra la desigualdad, entendida como la disparidad de oportunidades, la falta de acceso o la discriminación y la injusticia entre los ciudadanos.  - En segundo lugar, fomentar un crecimiento armonioso, sostenible e integrador.  - Y en tercer lugar, lograr una mayor participación ciudadana en las decisiones que afectan a todos los chilenos.  En otras palabras, no estamos hablando de volver a escribir, sino más bien de consolidar nuestra historia de desarrollo y democracia, llevar a cabo mejoras y cambios donde todavía existen deficiencias.  Y esto no es sólo idea mía o la de las personas que votaron por mí: es un consenso nacional construido a lo largo de los años. Aunque hay diferencias legítimas sobre las mejores formas de lograr las transformaciones - y es por eso que hemos puesto en marcha un amplio debate nacional - nadie en Chile niega la necesidad de un cambio.  Porque, como en la mayoría de las naciones del planeta, la sociedad misma ha cambiado mucho en los últimos años. Los ciudadanos se han vuelto más activos, más críticos, mejor informados y más exigentes. Y, yo diría, más desafiantes.  Millones de voces en una multitud de idiomas están llamando a las sociedades a que no olviden, en sus relaciones institucionales, en su gestión económica y en el diseño de sus políticas públicas lo que debería ser el foco de cualquier contrato social: las personas.  Aunque desde el punto de vista del Gobierno, esta demanda representa un desafío, es uno interesante e importante: el desafío de garantizar que las personas estén más involucradas en la toma de decisiones sobre cuestiones que les afecten, por lo que las políticas de desarrollo se traduzcan en calidad de vida, cohesión social y democracia.  Para nosotros esto significa revalorar la vida colectiva y el interés público, promoviendo el diálogo con un sentido cívico y un respeto por las diferencias. El desafío de eliminar las desigualdades tiene un componente ético, pues se refiere a una buena vida para todos.  Pero, también tiene un componente económico.  Eso es lo que digo, lo que hay por hacer, pero también lo más inteligente por hacer.  Porque sabemos que necesitamos un crecimiento económico dinámico y sostenido con el fin de hacer frente a la desigualdad, erradicar la pobreza, crear oportunidades de desarrollo y generar ingresos para la implementación de las políticas de bienestar social.  Y así es como, en ambos sentidos, Chile ha decidido asumir y ampliar los innegables progresos realizados por el país desde el retorno a la democracia, reconociendo los nuevos desafíos de hoy y centrándose en la gobernabilidad para el crecimiento y en la estabilidad de la democracia.  Alrededor del 2020, Chile habrá alcanzado un ingreso per cápita similar al de las economías desarrolladas. Pero no vamos a ser un país verdaderamente desarrollado si seguimos siendo uno de los países de la OCDE con mayor desigualdad de ingresos.   Y esta desigualdad afecta nuestra cohesión social y nuestras perspectivas de desarrollo económico. Es por esto que debemos abordar con decisión y, al mismo tiempo, optar por la inclusión y el crecimiento. Como la mayoría de los chilenos, estoy convencida de que el mayor riesgo para la estabilidad y el progreso de Chile está en no hacer los cambios que tenemos que hacer.  Porque la desigualdad socava uno de los fundamentos más importantes tanto de la economía como de la democracia: la confianza. La confianza en los mercados. La confianza en las instituciones y su estabilidad. La confianza en las relaciones sociales.  Y la confianza es un bien precioso que hoy Chile ha decidido mejorar, reducir las desigualdades y fomentar la cooperación entre el Estado, la ciudadanía y el mercado. Y éste es el significado subyacente de nuestras reformas. Y estamos optimistas, ya que ésta es la mejor manera de construir un país mejor para todos.   Tenemos una base sólida sobre la que construir. En los últimos años, el crecimiento económico de Chile ha sido positivo y el desempleo ha disminuido. Esto permitió que se hicieran importantes avances en la expansión de los derechos sociales y las oportunidades para la gente.  Esto refleja la situación financiera mundial, los buenos precios del cobre en los últimos años y nuestra respuesta monetaria y fiscal a la crisis financiera.  Estas condiciones son cíclicas y difíciles de replicar. Cuando los factores subyacentes al dinamismo de nuestra economía desaparecen, las perspectivas de crecimiento retrocederán.    Chile está experimentando un período de bajo crecimiento, por debajo de su potencial del PIB, y tenemos que responder al desafío que esto representa. Se estima que el crecimiento de Chile para el 2014 será en poco más de 3%.  A partir de 2015, nuestro objetivo es retomar la senda de crecimiento constante y, en la segunda mitad de la próxima administración, el crecimiento de Chile estará al alrededor del 5%, en su nivel potencial de PIB.    Nos hemos fijado objetivos ambiciosos, pero estamos tomando un enfoque realista de estas condiciones económicas a las que nos enfrentamos.   Necesitamos generar más crecimiento económico, pero no crecimiento de cualquier tipo. Necesitamos un crecimiento que sea socialmente legítimo e inclusivo, ambientalmente sostenible y orientado a la democracia.   Para ello, tenemos que ampliar la base de nuestro desarrollo por medio de reformas estructurales. La sociedad chilena, la ciudadanía y nuestra economía indican que ahora es el momento para llevar a cabo este tipo de reformas.  ¿Cuáles son los cambios que proponemos y que ya están en marcha?  Uno: una reforma estructural de la Educación centrada en la calidad, la Educación Pública y la inclusión;  Dos: la estimulación del crecimiento económico y la productividad, la innovación y la competitividad. Y esto, obviamente, también implica hacer frente a los desafíos que enfrentamos en materia de energía.  Tres: la reforma tributaria que proporciona los recursos actuales para el Estado y redistribuir más equitativamente los esfuerzos de desarrollo común. También debe llevarnos de vuelta al camino de la responsabilidad fiscal, que es esencial para que el Estado deba honrar sus compromisos en el mediano y largo plazo.  Cuatro: una nueva Constitución, una actualizada, que permita un mayor margen para la democracia, la participación y garantías para las personas en toda su diversidad. Me gustaría referirme brevemente a todos estos temas.  En primer lugar, la educación, lo que fomenta la equidad, la productividad y la democracia.  No voy a decir nada que tenga valor agregado, pero el conocimiento es esencial para lograr la prosperidad permanente en todas estas áreas. Y para generar este conocimiento, los países deben hacer de la educación el foco de su estrategia de desarrollo.  Esto es lo que hicieron los países que ahora han alcanzado el desarrollo, como Finlandia o Japón, Singapur o el Reino Unido.   Chile necesita y en voz alta exige un cambio transcendental para mejorar la calidad, el alcance y la cobertura de la educación en todos los niveles.  Sin duda, ustedes recordarán haber escuchado las noticias, hace tres años, que miles de estudiantes de Santiago emitieron una demanda estructural: el derecho a la educación gratuita y de calidad.  Hubo un tiempo en que muchos jóvenes estaban en las calles en todo el mundo. Yo estaba aquí trabajando en la ONU, y todos me preguntaban, en cualquier reunión: "¿Cómo se explica esto? Porque entendemos que en el país se está debatiendo sobre la economía, sin embargo, ustedes lo están haciendo bien en la economía" "¿Cómo se explica eso? Ustedes está haciéndolo bien en la economía y aun así la gente se está manifestando de forma masiva en las calles"  Tengo que señalar que la demanda de los estudiantes  hizo eco a través de una sociedad ansiosa de garantizar que todos los niños y jóvenes reciban no sólo  educación básica, sino también los estándares adecuados de calidad, más allá de lo que una familia pueda pagar.  Tengo que decirles que cuando un país está tan, yo diría, orgulloso de lo que ha construido,  que viene de una dictadura, y ha sido capaz de desarrollar, mantener y asegurar la democracia, con un buen desempeño económico, la gente cree ahora, en poco tiempo, que realmente se merece tener una educación de calidad para todos.  Chile tiene una tarea importante aquí. Hoy somos el país de la OCDE clasificado como el más dependiente de la financiación privada para su educación superior: exactamente el 85,4%. En Corea, Japón y el Reino Unido, la dependencia de las contribuciones de la familia es considerable, pero mucho menos que en Chile. En consecuencia, más inversión estatal en la educación es crucial para una sociedad con el objetivo de un desarrollo equitativo y sostenible.  Y sé que esto también se discute aquí en los Estados Unidos, en relación a  la educación y cómo los estudiantes la están viviendo ahora.   Chile debe subsanar las deficiencias del sistema actual y ofrecer garantías de los principios que subyacen nuestro derecho a la educación: la integración, la universalidad y la calidad.  Es por ello que hemos iniciado esta reforma estructural que ya está en marcha. Nuestras propuestas se refieren a diversos aspectos:  - Mejora de la Educación Pública.  - El fin de la selección discriminatoria de los estudiantes, el fin del lucro en los establecimientos que reciben fondos públicos y el fin del copago por parte los padres en las instituciones con financiación mixta. En otras palabras, queremos que las familias no tengan que pagar por la Educación de sus hijos en un establecimiento que recibe fondos del Estado.  - En segundo lugar, la creación de dos nuevas universidades públicas. Éstas se crearán en dos regiones donde no haya universidades públicas.   - Y en tercer lugar, la creación de instituciones y la mejora de la cobertura de la Educación Preescolar.  Además, estamos garantizando el acceso a la universidad para los estudiantes más vulnerables a través de un programa especial de acceso a la Educación Superior. Y estamos mejorando la Educación Técnica en todo Chile, con los auspicios de las universidades regionales y con los proyectos de Educación que reflejan las características económicas y productivas de cada territorio.  ¿Cuál es nuestro objetivo?  Nuestro objetivo es garantizar que todos los estudiantes en Chile, sin excepción, puedan obtener una educación de calidad gratuita.  Lo que realmente queremos es no perder ninguno de todos esos talentos y capacidades que tienen las personas, y no distribuirlos de acuerdo a  los ingresos de la familia.  Así que necesitamos que todos tengan las oportunidades para una buena educación y contribuir al desarrollo del país.  Los proveedores privados de Educación pueden seguir participando, si cumplen con los estándares de calidad, prohíben todas las formas de discriminación y asumen la responsabilidad y las obligaciones del servicio público.  Por supuesto, el Estado debe desempeñar el rol principal tanto en la entrega como en la regulación de la Educación.  Esto formará ciudadanos mejor informados, promoverá la movilidad social, la equidad y la inclusión y permitirá que el crecimiento de Chile no dependa sólo de sus recursos naturales, sino también del conocimiento de su gente.  Y esto me lleva a otro foco de mi Gobierno: el desarrollo de la producción y la competitividad.  Sabemos que la productividad aumenta lentamente en Chile. Y también sabemos que la innovación es el principal desencadenante del crecimiento a largo plazo. Por lo tanto, debemos añadir más conocimiento, más complejidad y más innovación a nuestra economía y también involucrar a aquellos que no están participando hoy o que están participando por debajo de su potencial.  También debemos diversificar nuestra matriz de producción. Además de la explotación de nuestros recursos naturales, y en particular el cobre, otros sectores productivos deben contribuir relativamente más a la generación de riqueza y el crecimiento económico.   Para que esto suceda, es esencial la formación de recursos humanos. En consecuencia, hemos puesto en marcha iniciativas para ampliar la cobertura, la contribución a la productividad y la relevancia de la formación para el trabajo. A través de planes especializados y específicos, estamos haciendo un esfuerzo especial para generar los incentivos adecuados para aumentar la participación de las mujeres y los jóvenes en el mundo laboral.    En Chile, estos dos grupos tienen las tasas más bajas de participación en el mercado laboral: el 54,6% de las mujeres y el 37,1% de los jóvenes. Estas cifras son, respectivamente, 7,7 y 10,3 puntos porcentuales por debajo del promedio de la OCDE.   Además de la inversión en capital humano, vamos a aumentar la inversión en ciencia, tecnología e innovación, ofreciendo incentivos para su aplicación a la solución de los problemas del país.  Debemos poner en práctica una estrategia que tenga en cuenta las condiciones, fortalezas y necesidades de nuestro país. Una estrategia basada en la investigación y la innovación, en el que la iniciativa pública / privada es esencial.  En este contexto, hemos anunciado dos programas de gran alcance que van al corazón de la actividad económica: La Agenda de Productividad, Innovación y Crecimiento y el Programa de Energía.   La Agenda para la Productividad, Innovación y Crecimiento se centra en la estrategia de desarrollo para la diversificación de la matriz de la producción; inclusión de más personas en el mercado laboral; incorporación de nuevos sectores económicos de nuestra canasta de exportaciones; estímulo de nuestras áreas estratégicas; apoyo a las pequeñas y medianas empresas; y la creación de infraestructura pública de calidad.  Este amplio programa incluye una serie de medidas por lo que la experiencia de los Estados Unidos va a ser muy útil para nosotros.  Por ejemplo, este programa contempla una red nacional de Centros de Desarrollo Empresarial, que prestará asesoramiento integral para ayudar a las pequeñas y medianas empresas a mejorar sus modelos de negocio.   Y yo sé que ustedes tienen Centros de Desarrollo Empresarial, que son nuestra inspiración, y ya estamos cooperando en relación con este proyecto.  Bueno, no voy a describir la agenda completa. Es muy grande, es larga y está disponible para el público, pero quiero añadir que también tendremos un sistema de agrupaciones para apoyar la diversificación productiva de nuestra economía y la expansión y el fortalecimiento de los sectores ya consolidados.  A través de estas acciones, vamos a financiar bienes públicos para reforzar proyectos de inversión significativos, con un enfoque en sectores con alto potencial de crecimiento y creación de empleo.  Sin embargo, mientras se establezcan nuevos objetivos de productividad, también estamos conscientes de que Chile se enfrenta a importantes desafíos energéticos.   Chile importa el 60% de su energía primaria. Esto significa que nuestro país es sensible a la inestabilidad de los precios y la volatilidad en los mercados internacionales, y para suministrar restricciones.   Tenemos que invertir en proyectos de infraestructura y nueva generación y transmisión con el fin de reducir esta dependencia. Esto no ha estado sucediendo en los últimos años. Y esto significa que no hemos incorporado energía básica que podamos utilizar para garantizar un suministro fiable en el corto y mediano plazo.  Estamos conscientes de la urgente necesidad de impulsar proyectos para reducir el déficit de energía y hemos dicho que vamos a apoyar firmemente a todas las iniciativas que cumplan con las normas vigentes y que son un buen ajuste en nuestras regiones. También en este ámbito, el Estado y el sector privado deben trabajar juntos.  Y este es un punto clave, ya que uno de los obstáculos para el crecimiento del sector es la falta de "permisos sociales" para algunos proyectos.  Hay desafíos importantes aquí: fortalecer la estructura institucional de la energía y de trabajar para conciliar los intereses de las comunidades locales con las de los proyectos de generación y transmisión de energía. Esto significa trabajar en una etapa temprana, siguiendo reglas claras, para garantizar que el desarrollo de estos proyectos es factible en el mediano y largo plazo.  Por tanto, estamos trabajando en un plan de desarrollo territorial que nos permita decidir qué proyectos se pueden localizar y dónde.  Queremos ver a todos los accionistas juntos definir las áreas de desarrollo, para que podamos llegar a acuerdos al respecto.   Sin embargo, también nos enfrentamos al desafío de mejorar la competencia en el mercado de la energía y el fomento de nuevos actores para entrar en el mercado. En esta visita, esperamos ser capaces de estudiar la experiencia de los Estados Unidos, de la que tenemos mucho que aprender acerca de la distribución de gas, energías renovables no convencionales, la eficiencia energética y las buenas prácticas.  Quiero hacer hincapié en esto: es urgente para Chile garantizar el desarrollo eficiente y confiable de energía a precios competitivos, pero al mismo tiempo a  utilizar nuestros recursos renovables en forma sustentable y no contaminante.  Este es el significado de nuestra agenda energética: asegurar que el país contará con una matriz energética diversificada, equilibrada y sustentable.  Nuestro objetivo es reducir los precios de la energía, lo que garantiza una mayor competencia, la eficiencia y la diversificación en el mercado energético.  Velaremos por que el 45% de la capacidad de generación eléctrica que instalamos entre 2014 y 2025 provenga de fuentes no convencionales de energía renovables, a fin de que éstos representen el 20% de la matriz energética de Chile dentro de una década.  Además, hemos propuesto que la eficiencia energética debe ser una política de Estado, la regla más que la excepción. Nuestro objetivo es que seamos capaces de reducir nuestro consumo en un 20% para el año 2025. Estamos hablando de eficiencia.  En última instancia, el objetivo de esta agenda es dar certeza a todos los actores relevantes, para aumentar la previsibilidad, para tranquilizar a las comunidades e introducir claridad en las reglas para los inversionistas.  Queridos amigos:   Sé que esto es un extenso programa de cambio. Sin embargo, el punto es que los chilenos quieren implementarlo preservando el crecimiento y la gobernabilidad de la democracia que hemos construido con esfuerzo considerable.  En consecuencia, nuestra política fiscal continuará siendo guiada por la política de balance estructural, debido a que el compromiso de los nuevos gastos permanentes siempre debe estar vinculado a los ingresos permanentes. Ésta es la primera responsabilidad de un Estado respecto de su pueblo.  Por esta razón, en vista de la necesidad de emprender una reforma estructural de la educación y otros requisitos de bienestar social, estaremos implementando una reforma tributaria que le dará al Estado los ingresos necesarios, sobre una base sostenible, equivalente al 3% del PIB.   Además de proporcionar ingresos permanentes, el objetivo de la reforma es también mejorar la distribución del ingreso y la equidad fiscal.  En Chile, tenemos una triste paradoja: la brecha entre los ingresos de los más ricos y los hogares más pobres no se reduce después del pago de impuestos. Este es un problema que hay que resolver como país.  En virtud de esta reforma, actualmente en el Congreso, aquellos con los ingresos más altos deben hacer un mayor esfuerzo para contribuir a los ingresos públicos.  Y esta es una reforma bien estructurada, con incentivos bien diseñados, para ser introducida gradualmente.   Algunos han tratado de describir esta reforma como anti-crecimiento. Me gustaría decir que, cuando los países desarrollados tenían un ingreso per cápita similar al de Chile hoy en día, la mayoría de ellos tenían cargas fiscales considerablemente más altas que las de Chile y los sistemas fiscales que ayudaron a redistribuir el ingreso. Esos países se desarrollaron a medida que cobraban los impuestos más altos y proporcionan a sus ciudadanos un nivel mucho más alto de vida.  Chile es susceptible de mejorar en cuanto al sistema fiscal. En 2010, la carga tributaria de Chile fue del 18,4 % y el promedio fue de 21,6 % para los países de la OCDE que en ese momento tenían un PIB per cápita similar al de Chile.  No hay ninguna razón por la que Chile no pueda seguir el mismo camino. La reforma tributaria que he descrito puede no agradar a todos, no agrada a nadie, tengo que decirlo, pero es esencial si queremos hacer frente a las desigualdades y continuar con el desarrollo.    Cabe señalar que el efecto esperado de la mayor tributación sobre el ahorro público y la formación de capital humano, será más que compensado en los efectos a corto plazo respecto a la inversión.  Por otra parte, el aumento de impuestos tendrá poco o ningún efecto sobre la inversión.   Chile es un jugador activo en los mercados financieros internacionales, con un bajo nivel de riesgo. Gracias a nuestras políticas macroeconómicas y solidez fiscal, tenemos una clasificación de bajo riesgo a nivel mundial y es la economía con el riesgo más bajo de América Latina.   No tenemos ninguna razón para temer que una reforma fiscal destinada a la inversión en capital humano alteraría nuestro curso de desarrollo económico.   El Sistema fiscal es sólo uno de los factores que afectan la inversión. Y está lejos de ser el más importante. Los estudios sobre el tema concluyen que los factores más importantes para la inversión son los siguientes: (1) la cohesión social y la estabilidad política; (2) la calidad y la credibilidad de las instituciones públicas; (3) la accesibilidad y la competitividad de los mercados, incluyendo los mercados financieros; (4) la infraestructura; y (5) la legislación económica apropiada.  Y en todas estas áreas estamos cumpliendo con nuestros desafíos.  No voy a describir en detalle todas las reformas fiscales, pero no quiero dejar de decir que tienen cuatro objetivos:  1. Aumentar la presión fiscal para financiar gastos corrientes con los ingresos permanentes: la reforma educativa en la que estamos inmersos, otras políticas de bienestar social, y la reducción del déficit estructural en las cuentas fiscales.  2. Mejorar la distribución del ingreso y la equidad fiscal.  3. Introducir nuevas y más eficientes formas de fomentar el ahorro y la inversión.  4. Implementar medidas para reducir la evasión fiscal y el bajo pulso. Esa es la palabra, bajo pulso.   Sé que uno de los aspectos de esta reforma fiscal será de interés para ustedes: la derogación de la Ley 600 en relación con el Estatuto de la Inversión Extranjera, los nuevos proyectos de inversión y una cláusula de invariabilidad tributaria.  Esta legislación fue aprobada en 1974, en un contexto político, social y económico muy diferente, cuando había una dictadura en Chile y nuestro prestigio internacional estaba en un nivel muy bajo. La falta de democracia, la falta de libertad y la falta de fiabilidad de nuestras instituciones significaba que se necesitaran mecanismos como éste con el fin de alentar a los extranjeros a invertir.  Después de 25 años de democracia, con nuestro sólido prestigio internacional, en un contexto de la buena gobernabilidad, democracia y libertad, ya no necesitamos este mecanismo para hacer que los inversores extranjeros vean con buenos ojos la idea de invertir en nuestro país.  La estabilidad institucional de nuestro país nos permite tomar la decisión de interrumpir este mecanismo sin afectar a las inversiones extranjeras en Chile. Me gustaría compartir algunas cifras con ustedes.   Chile tiene acuerdos comerciales con 61 países. Estos países representan el 63% de la población mundial y el 85% del PIB mundial. Además, Chile ocupa el lugar 34 entre 144 economías en el Índice para Hacer Negocios del Banco Mundial.  Por lo que respecta a Chile como lugar para hacer negocios, me gustaría decir que en 2013 nuestro país fue una de las primeras 20 economías receptoras de inversión extranjera directa; clasificó en el puesto 18, según la Conferencia de las Naciones Unidas sobre Comercio y Desarrollo.  Nuestra política exterior también ha cambiado. No sé si se trata de un cambio, pero también estamos tratando de tener nuevas prioridades, nuevos enfoques. Y estamos buscando en América Latina y el Caribe como una opción muy importante.  América Latina es nuestro espacio natural, y de ahí vamos a acercarnos al mundo. Nos damos cuenta de que es una región diversa, pero que hay que respetar los diferentes caminos para el desarrollo. Las diferencias no son obstáculos para las convergencias. Creemos que Chile puede ayudar a construir puentes de entendimiento por encima de las diferencias de enfoque y que, como he señalado en muchas ocasiones, la región presenta la cara más unida posible al mundo. Esta visión explica precisamente nuestra concepción de la Alianza del Pacífico: un proyecto de integración económica que no excluye ni se opone a otros esquemas de integración. Hace unos días en México, he reafirmado nuestro compromiso con la Alianza del Pacífico.  Del mismo modo, hemos promovido la convergencia y el diálogo entre la Alianza del Pacífico y los países del MERCOSUR, sin diluir la especificidad de la Alianza o sus tasas de progreso.  Debemos prestar especial atención a América Latina y vamos a seguir desarrollando nuestras excelentes relaciones políticas, económicas y culturales con nuestros socios en Europa, Asia Pacífico y, en particular, América del Norte.  Nuestras relaciones con los Estados Unidos se caracterizan por su solidez, confianza y madurez, lo que refleja importantes principios, valores e intereses compartidos. Creemos en la fuerza y la importancia de la democracia y el Estado de Derecho; y defendemos los derechos de las personas y sus libertades fundamentales. Además, compartimos una visión común de la importancia del libre comercio para asegurar el desarrollo y el estímulo a la inversión, y estamos trabajando juntos para crear un sistema de comercio multilateral basado en reglas claras, previsibles y transparentes.  Chile y Estados Unidos deben avanzar en nuestra relación. Estoy segura de que, después de esta visita, surgirán nuevas dimensiones y áreas de conocimiento para una nueva asociación enfocada en la cooperación científica y técnica, la innovación, la energía y la educación, entre otras cosas.  Queridos amigos:  Al comienzo de este discurso, hablé de la importancia de la confianza para lograr el desarrollo de un país.  Esta confianza también depende de la mejora continua y la ampliación de los derechos democráticos de los ciudadanos.  Es por eso que he abogado por una nueva Constitución.  Nuestra Constitución vigente data de 1980 y fue adoptada en condiciones que hoy nadie podría calificar de democráticas. A pesar de las numerosas modificaciones introducidas en las últimas décadas, todavía tiene este "déficit de origen", si se me permite utilizar este término.   Además, contiene disposiciones que limitan las mayorías electorales, permitiendo a las minorías empatar con las mayorías. Esto es contrario a uno de los principios básicos de cualquier Estado moderno: el respeto a la voz de la mayoría y no permitir que unos pocos veten lo que una nación quiere. Además, este empate forzado hace que sea difícil para el país resolver democráticamente sus diferencias.  Un pacto social plenamente democrático es una condición esencial para la confianza en las instituciones, la confianza en el Estado y la confianza en la política. Y es esencial para una sociedad sana, en la que el espíritu de empresa prospera y la iniciativa privada tiene la certeza y estabilidad para su acción.  Mientras hemos estado sentando las bases de una nueva Constitución, que es necesariamente un largo proceso de diálogo y participación, no hemos permanecido inactivos.  Tras más de 20 años de discusión, Chile ha abolido una exclusión importante: a partir de las próximas elecciones presidenciales, los chilenos residentes en el exterior podrán votar.  Además, hemos elaborado un proyecto de ley para reformar nuestro sistema electoral binominal, que en la práctica permite un empate entre las mayorías y las minorías en términos de representación legislativa, sustituyéndolo por un sistema proporcional que prevé un mayor nivel de competencia y representatividad, especialmente para los partidos más pequeños.  Y añadiré que estamos tratando también de introducir un equilibrio, un equilibrio moderado en el Parlamento. Estamos muy lejos de eso.  Estamos adoptando este curso porque estamos convencidos de que el fortalecimiento de la democracia es la clave para una sociedad más sólida. Una sociedad anclada en el respeto a la individualidad y la diferencia, pero que garantiza a cada persona las normas adecuadas de respeto y el bienestar. Y también una sociedad que tiene los mecanismos institucionales legítimos para resolver sus diferencias.  Es en este espacio de respeto y confianza, que los proyectos colectivos pueden desarrollarse, vinculando las expectativas individuales e iniciativas con los grandes sueños de la sociedad.  Las transformaciones que he descrito aquí requerirán tiempo y la introducción gradual, para que puedan madurar con el diálogo y la participación democrática y puedan ser ancladas de forma duradera y legítima en nuestra sociedad y en nuestras instituciones. De esta forma, podrán contar con el apoyo de una sólida economía y las instituciones legítimas. Muchos de ellas durarán más allá de un período de gobierno, porque estamos pensando en el desarrollo a largo plazo. Chile no es un país populista, sabemos que la responsabilidad económica y la legitimidad democrática son la única manera de crear bienestar duradero y equitativo para cada uno de sus ciudadanos.  Queridos amigos,  En el solsticio, que ocurrió la semana pasada, las culturas indígenas de Chile celebran el Año Nuevo, como es el caso en muchos lugares. Es el comienzo de un nuevo ciclo de trabajo colectivo, organización y compromiso, con ganas de una buena cosecha.  Y ésta es la tarea en la que, en este nuevo ciclo, nos hemos embarcado como sociedad. Y, al igual que las estaciones del año, que representa no una interrupción si no la sabiduría para reconocer las tareas que se ajustan a cada momento. Por lo tanto, vamos a sembrar una semilla de capital social, la cohesión y el bienestar con raíces profundas, que es la base de todo el desarrollo sólido y sostenible.  Sé que la gran tarea en la que Chile se ha embarcado en mi mandato tendrá una duración de varios calendarios pero será un presagio de la primavera en todo su esplendor. Esta es la razón de nuestro optimismo y nuestra incansable labor.  Muchas gracias.  *****