WORDS BY H.E. PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE, MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA ON PANEL “REIMAGINING IMPACT IN THE CLINTON GLOBAL INITIATIVE ANNUAL CONFERENCE   New York, September 22th, 2014  Bill Clinton: Now, I would also like to invite to the stage the President of Chile, which under the per capita basis it’s the strongest economy in Latin America and it’s leading the way in many areas, Michelle Bachelet.  So, the first thing that I would like to do is asking to you, we will start, President Bachelet, since regarding open with Jordan.  You came in 2006 when you just had been elected President of Chile. And after that, you returned and you became the first leader of UN Women from 2010 to 2013.   And then, you did such a good job the first time than you were back.   But, what are the differences now and then in Latin America and the world? Why did you decide running again? Are the problems different or are the opportunities different between now and what you did at the first time?   President Bachelet: Thank you Bill, I’m happy to be here again. I really appreciate what the Clinton Global Initiative is doing.   I would like to start saying why I am running again because I just couldn’t help it, maybe in my milk-bottle was the word “responsibility”, but let me go directly to your question.    Maybe, a little bit of even before I assumed in office in 2006. In 2000, 189 countries pledged, you know we had a million of goals, try to really improve the life of millions of people. And there was in a lot of different areas, but one of the main goals was to reduce extreme poverty.   And by 2010, it was that we attended that goal to reduce a half the rates of extreme poverty. And I will say that of eight goals of the MDGs, the majority has been softly attended.    But what I mean that the world is much better for millions of people but still it’s lacking behind a lot of them. One of each eight persons in the world still has hunger and 1.200 millions of people still are in poverty and so on.  And two of the goals that didn’t do well is ensuring education for all and the second is environmental sustainability.  So now, in 2015, World Community will have to decide what  new goals, what the new objectives that we should put altogether to be able to improve people’s lives and then there will be an interesting discussion. And I think it is the central part of it. Inequality is still remaining issue.    So how we built a much more inclusive, not only a global, community. And, of course, there is in each country.   In Chile, in my case, it was new what I found, since the first term, and the second term, because even that we have progressed a lot, people understand that the progress means we need to improve in many different areas like Education, Health, pensions, etc. and at the same time ensure that the economy grows and with that we can ensure that involving to all the citizen.   I would say we have improved, we have done well in some issues but it’s still so much to do. And you were talking about Jordanian and the Syrian refugees and so on. And we will look not only the social problems when we are looking at them; we look a crisis and conflicts that we see on the world.    There are many different factors that it explains that. But I think it is also the difficulties of the society to include.  And when I am talking to include, I mean political inclusion, religious inclusion and, of course, social inclusion.   So I think we can have a peacekeeping cooperation and a lot of things but we need to tackle the rules of the structure problems that are producing these conflicts.  So if the world wants to live in peace, we need to advance much more for a more inclusive and just world for all.   Bill Clinton: Let me ask you a related question and it’s all you did in your UN Women job.  And here you are, the first female President to do a second term, maybe, anywhere, in the world.  And we are going to, let’s talk for sure, as four more years a female President in Brazil, the biggest country in Latin America.   Because the two contestants, interested in line off both of which can be a matter different on social reforms movements in Brazil, are competing each other for announce first the ladies rights.  What does she will do? I can tell you this. Most of the rest of the world think that Latin American is the “real macho place”, what it is really surprising that there doing so much better, that a lot of people think more inline on such matters.  So, what is it mean? It doesn’t mean anything it is just happening by accident and most out of the people think that it happens that there’re more spaces now for women to deliver up to their leadership potentials on politics. And it’s all what it happens, what is it mean?   President Bachelet: Well, Bill, I think that both issues are true.  But we shouldn’t misunderstand what’s going on.  I also wanted a second run competing with other female candidate for a first time in Chile.   And probably I’m the first President reelected with a minor immediately from the twenties in my country, it is not very frequent.   But I have said that it’s what you can look at Chile, for example: you have a female President of the Republic; a female president of the Senate; a female president of the biggest trade union, a group of confederation of trade union; in the two biggest universities, the heads of them are girls too.  So there are a lot of spaces now but there’re no possibilities for vital for female in the country. But in the other hand, we’re still so far away where we should go. And there are still a lot of macho men in Latin American.  So, it’s not the perfect world for women and it is still, you know, it is not.     But I think, and I´ve always thought that an intense agenda for equality and women empowerment was a very important, of course, to work on economic empowerment, work on social and reproductive rights, work on all kind of issues.   But political empowerment is essential and symbolic things are essential because when there’re no women in a high level position, people can’t talk about “equal rights”. But it was just, you know, “a speech”.   But when you see those women are able to be in very important positions and do it well, then it’s a model for others and it is a very important issue that could help other women to get into the places that they deserve.   And at least, as I and you said, there’s no nobody there to say out loud. I do believe in women that mean they are capable.   So I think intensely how we empower women because I think that to empower women is important for the whole world, for women and men.  We need to see something that I learnt in life, as President, as minister, as, of course, secretary or executive director of UN Women.   First is that women have still a lot of discrimination all over world, in different cultures. Even countries that you believe as the most advanced, women still have gaps of salary. They don’t earn the same as men doing the same job. So there’s a lot of it into there.  Still even does no way probably in one of the countries have started with 40% of women in the board on the companies and they were very successful and still this is not something that it’s in all over the world.  You need to ensure that, even those that this happens, violence against women is in all over the world, in different cultures. We need to tackle that issue.  But then even do every woman in the world don’t have the same opportunities than men, with one society that doesn’t fit all. We need to look at the particularities because probably what happens in the east middle countries is different from Asia, Latin American, Europe or US.   And the third thing is that the struggle for one woman is the struggle of the whole women of the world. So we need to continue working very strongly.  And I do believe that this could mean a better world for all for many reasons. When a woman has an income, 90% of the income is dedicated for Health, house, school, etc. we know that when a woman has education, the children will have much more opportunities in the future.  So when we’re talking about empowering women and giving them the place that they deserve, but also at the company levels when you have more women in different levels of decision making and positions, the company does better.   So it is usual to believe in it, but the thing is that I asked myself, being Executive Director, because we have so much evidence.  And Hillary, in a meeting on Women empowerment in California, some years ago, in the APEC meeting, when she was Secretary of State, she did a fantastic presentation.  But the thing is if you talk to many headers of states and governments about this, and they say “yeah, yeah, yeah”, but nothing happens really.  So I’ve always asked myself how we will be able to build strong,  I would say, decisive arguments that they should show how the world would be much better if men and women have equal rights and opportunities.  Bill Clinton: I know you have to go, but on the way I wanna give the chance to comment in one of biggest issue now, which is recognizes the enormous prosperity that Chile has with respect to other countries of the region and your run for you provided that you wanna is to reduce the inequality, what it reminds you want more broadly ensure the prosperity.  And empowerment of women is part of it, but it involves access to all the same resources and capable to get business on it.   What would you like to these areas that we know about? in by the way, standard and poors, not some left in groups, standards and poors in analyzers that holds start marking the situation easily as the report is saying there’s a real income inequalities in America. There’s an exponential constrain on the long-term growth.    And this is discussed for other countries as well. So, before you leave just tell us what we all want to know, what should we do? What should we do in equality issues?   President Bachelet: Well, the first thing is that I always when I talk to business people, I talk because we decide to tackle the inequality, to do two things, some, I will say, a very transformative and structure changes and some, of course, daily changes, on health, pensions and so on.   But we understood that we needed to do two or three things: one was to make a very strong education reform, because education for us is essential, in both ways, because it will permit everyone not to lose, as the King Abdullah said, anyone’s talents. But also is an economic challenge, because we need to improve all productivity or competitiveness through innovation and more science and technology, and so on.  So I do believe that everybody wins when you have a human capital that it is real and strong and have the possibility not only to improve their lives, but also contribute to society.   And for us, in order to do that, we need to change the way education has been seen in our country. And I know that this mind not be everyone’s agreed with it, but in our country we have full access to education. Everybody can go to the education at primary level, secondary level and in the tertiary level, of course, it depends on, but it’s still limited.   What we want?  It is not only access to education because we do part of access. But access to education maybe is the first step for a country who are far away from that goal.   But, for a country like Chile, that it is a middle income country, that has a lot of access, that’s not enough.   So we need quality education for all. And quality education for all means that our country still needs to change the paradigm behind the educational model. We need to ensure that the quality of education is the right for everyone.   So, we need to solve the issues of money because in our country, families must have money can give a good education to the children. But families don’t have enough money and they receive the education they can have.   So what we’re trying to make is a reform that ensures good and quality education for everyone.  And that means a lot of other steps like free of charge, but, of course, that’s leading to a tax reform that we’ve just approved in five months of government. We approved a tax reform that will mean a 3% of the GDP to increase and most of that will go to health and education, particularly, to ensure from initial education, from zero, to tertiary education, access to education with a high level of quality.  This is what we can do for tackling the inequality, but also this is the way to really not lose everyone’s contribution to the country.  So it is one of the things that I’ve been discussing many times with the business community, because sometimes they see that the Agenda is bold and transformative, and they feel that it’s a threat for them and they say “you know what!  The real threat on the country is that we don’t tackle the inequality.   We’ve have seen in all over the places in the world. People are so frustrated if they see the GDP is going up but the lives are going down and worst, that’s is a threat that we can continue establish social riots with a social non-cohesion.  So the thing that I’ve been trying to do is how we ensure transformation that can really go into the direction of a better country for all, but doing at same time with governance in peaceful way and the most constructive way.  That’s the kind of change that we are trying to put more full way in my country.    INTERVENCIÓN DE S.E. LA PRESIDENTA DE LA REPÚBLICA DE CHILE, MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, EN EL PANEL “REVISUALIZANDO EL IMPACTO” DE LA CONFERENCIA ANUAL DE CLINTON GLOBAL INITIATIVE (traducción)   Nueva York, 22 de septiembre de 2014   Bill Clinton: Ahora, también me gustaría invitar al escenario a la Presidenta de Chile, que bajo la base per cápita es la economía más fuerte de Latinoamérica y que va a la vanguardia en muchas áreas, Michelle Bachelet.   Así que lo primero que me gustaría hacer es preguntarle, por lo que comenzaremos, Presidenta Bachelet, abriendo con lo de Jordania.   Usted vino en 2006 cuando recién había sido electa Presidenta de Chile. Y después de eso, regresó y se convirtió en la primera líder de ONU Mujeres entre 2010 y 2013.   Y entonces, usted hizo tan bien su trabajo la primera vez que regresó.   Sin embargo, ¿Cuáles son las diferencias ahora y en ese entonces en América Latina y el mundo? ¿Por qué decidió regresar a la política? ¿Son los problemas o las oportunidades diferentes entre lo que hizo la primera vez y lo que está haciendo ahora?    Presidenta Bachelet: Gracias, Bill, estoy muy contenta de estar aquí de nuevo. Realmente aprecio lo que está llevando a cabo la Clinton Global Initiative.   Me gustaría empezar diciendo que estoy de regreso porque no pude evitarlo, quizás en mi mamadera estaba la palabra “responsabilidad”, pero permítame ir directamente a su pregunta.   Tal vez, incluso un poco antes de que yo asumiera en el cargo en 2006. En el 2000, 189 países se comprometieron, usted sabe que teníamos un millón de objetivos, a tratar de mejorar de verdad la vida de millones de personas. Y había una gran cantidad de diferentes áreas, pero uno de los objetivos principales era reducir la pobreza extrema.  Y para el 2010, fue que abordamos ese objetivo de reducir los índices de pobreza extrema a la mitad. Y he de decir que de las ocho metas de los ODM1, la mayoría han sido abordados de manera superficial.   Sin embargo, lo que quiero decir es que el mundo es mucho mejor para millones de personas, pero todavía hay carencias detrás de un montón de ellos. Una de cada ocho personas en el mundo aún sufren de hambre y 1.200 millones de personas continúan en la pobreza y así sucesivamente.  Y dos de los objetivos que no se han hecho bien es garantizar la educación para todos y la segunda es la sostenibilidad ambiental.  Así que ahora, en 2015, la Comunidad Mundial tendrá que decidir cuáles son las nuevas metas, cuáles son los nuevos objetivos que deberíamos fijarnos para poder mejorar la vida de las personas y entonces generar una discusión interesante. Y creo que es la parte central de la misma. La desigualdad sigue siendo un tema pendiente.   Entonces, cómo construimos una comunidad, no sólo a nivel global, mucho más inclusiva. Y, por supuesto, sucede en cada país.   En Chile, en mi caso, era nuevo lo que me encontré, en el primer mandato, y en el segundo, porque incluso aunque hemos progresado mucho, la gente entiende que el progreso significa que tenemos que mejorar en muchas áreas diferentes, como Educación, Salud, las pensiones, etc., y al mismo tiempo garantizar que la economía crezca y con eso podemos asegurar que involucre a todos los ciudadanos.  Yo diría que hemos mejorado, lo hemos hecho bien en algunos temas pero aún hay mucho que hacer.  Ustedes estaban hablando de Jordania y los refugiados sirios, en fin. Veamos no sólo los problemas sociales cuando estemos indagando en ellos; observemos las crisis y conflictos que se ven en el mundo.  Hay muchos factores diferentes que explican eso. Pero creo que también se trata de las dificultades que tiene la sociedad para incluir. Y cuando hablo de incluir, me refiero a la inclusión política, la inclusión religiosa y, por supuesto, la inclusión social.  Por lo tanto, creo que podemos tener una cooperación de mantenimiento de la paz y un montón de cosas, pero tenemos que hacer frente a las reglas de los problemas estructurales que están produciendo estos conflictos.  Así que si el mundo quiere vivir en paz, tenemos que avanzar mucho más para un mundo más inclusivo y justo para todos.  Bill Clinton: Déjeme hacerle una pregunta relacionada con lo que hizo en su trabajo en ONU Mujeres.  Y aquí está usted, la primera mujer Presidenta para efectuar un segundo mandato, tal vez, en todo el mundo.  Y vamos a hablar a ciencia cierta cómo tendremos cuatro años más a una mujer Presidente en Brasil, el país más grande de América Latina.  Porque los dos contendientes, interesados en la misma línea pero concibiendo de forma diferente los movimientos de reforma social en Brasil, están compitiendo entre sí para anunciar primero los derechos de las mujeres.   ¿Qué va a hacer ella ahora? Porque le voy a decir lo siguiente. La mayor parte del mundo piensa que América Latina es “el verdadero hogar de los machistas”, lo que es sorprendente que ahí se estén haciendo las cosas bien, y que la gente crea en conjunto tales cuestiones.   ¿Qué significa esto? No significa que cualquier cosa pase sólo por accidente y que la mayoría de la gente piense que se están dando más espacios ahora para que a las mujeres se les entreguen potenciales de liderazgo en política. ¿Es todo lo que sucede?, ¿qué significa esto?    Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, Bill, creo que ambas cuestiones son verdaderas. Pero no hay que malinterpretar lo que está pasando. Yo también quise una segunda vuelta compitiendo con otra candidata por primera vez en Chile.  Y, probablemente, yo sea la primera Presidenta reelegida con menor inmediatez desde los años veinte en mi país, lo que no es muy frecuente.  Pero ya he dicho que es lo que se puede ver en Chile, por ejemplo: usted tiene una mujer Presidenta de la República; una mujer presidenta del Senado; una mujer presidenta del mayor sindicato, un grupo de confederación de sindicatos; en las dos universidades más grandes, las líderes de éstas son mujeres también.  De manera que hay una gran cantidad de espacios ahora pero todavía no hay posibilidades para que la figura de la mujer sea fundamental en el país. Sin embargo, por otro lado, todavía estamos muy lejos de donde deberíamos ir. Y todavía hay un montón de hombres machistas en América Latina.  Así que no es el mundo perfecto para las mujeres, y falta todavía, ya lo saben, no lo es.    Pero creo, y siempre he pensado, que una intensa agenda por la igualdad y el empoderamiento de las mujeres es muy importante, por supuesto para trabajar en el empoderamiento económico, trabajar sobre los derechos reproductivos y sociales, trabajar en todo tipo de cuestiones.  No obstante, el empoderamiento político es un elemento esencial y simbólico porque cuando no hay mujeres en una posición de alto nivel, la gente no puede hablar de "igualdad de derechos". Sólo es, ya saben, puro “discurso".  Pero cuando se ve a esas mujeres ser capaces de estar en posiciones muy importantes y hacerlo bien, entonces es un modelo para las demás y es un tema muy importante que podría ayudar a otras mujeres a entrar en lugares que se merecen.  Y por lo menos, como ustedes y yo hemos dicho, no hay nadie allí para alzar la voz. Yo sí creo en las mujeres, que son capaces.  Así que creo intensamente cómo podemos potenciar a las mujeres, porque creo que empoderar a las mujeres es importante para todo el mundo, para mujeres y hombres.  Tenemos que ver situaciones como las que yo he aprendido en la vida, como Presidenta, como ministra, como, por supuesto, secretaria o directora ejecutiva de ONU Mujeres.  En primer lugar, es que las mujeres tienen que enfrentar aún mucha discriminación en todo el mundo, en diferentes culturas. Incluso en países que se cree son más avanzados, las mujeres todavía tienen brechas de salario. No ganan lo mismo que los hombres haciendo el mismo trabajo. Así que hay un montón de que eso allí.   Más aún, probablemente esto se da en alguno de los países que han comenzado a incluir un 40% de mujeres en juntas directivas en las empresas y que tuvieron mucho éxito, y todavía esto no es algo que esté ocurriendo en todo el mundo.  Se necesita confirmar que, incluso a aquellas que les sucede, la violencia contra las mujeres ocurre en todo el mundo, en diferentes culturas. Tenemos que abordar este tema.  Pero entonces incluso hay que recalcar que todas las mujeres del mundo no tienen las mismas oportunidades que los hombres, en una sociedad que no sirve a todos. Tenemos que mirar las particularidades porque probablemente lo que ocurre en los países de Medio Oriente es diferente a lo que pasa en Asia, América Latina, Europa o Estados Unidos.  Y lo tercero es que la lucha por una mujer es la lucha por todas las mujeres del mundo. Así que tenemos que seguir trabajando muy fuertemente.  Y yo creo que esto podría significar un mundo mejor para todos, por muchas razones. Cuando una mujer tiene un ingreso, el 90% de los ingresos lo dedica a la Salud, a la casa, a la escuela, etc., y sabemos que cuando una mujer tiene la educación, los niños tendrán muchas más oportunidades en el futuro.  Así que cuando estamos hablando de empoderamiento de las mujeres y de darles el lugar que se merecen, también lo hacemos en los niveles de la empresa, cuando se tiene más mujeres en los diferentes niveles de toma de decisiones y posiciones, la empresa hace mejor.  Por lo que es habitual creer en ello, pero lo que pasa es que me lo pregunté a mí misma, siendo Directora Ejecutiva, porque tenemos tanta evidencia.  Y Hillary, en una reunión sobre empoderamiento de las mujeres en California, hace algunos años, en la reunión de APEC, cuando era Secretaria de Estado, hizo una presentación fantástica.  No obstante, lo que sucede es que si usted habla con varios líderes de Estado y de Gobierno, ellos dicen "sí, sí, sí", pero no pasa nada realmente.  Así que siempre me he preguntado cómo vamos a ser capaces de construir fuertes, yo diría, argumentos decisivos que debieran mostrar cómo el mundo sería mucho mejor si los hombres y las mujeres tuvieran los mismos derechos y oportunidades.  Bill Clinton: Sé que tiene que irse, pero entretanto  quiero darle la oportunidad de comentar sobre uno de los más temas importantes en la actualidad, que reconoce la enorme prosperidad que Chile tiene con respecto a otros países de la región y su intento por promover lo que usted desea, que es reducir la desigualdad, lo que nos recuerda que usted quiere asegurar, de forma más amplia, la prosperidad.   Y el empoderamiento de las mujeres es parte de eso, sin embargo, incluye el acceso a todos los mismos recursos y ser capaces de concretar negocios en ello.    ¿Qué le gustaría que supiéramos de estas áreas? A propósito, los grupos medios y pobres, no los que están fuera de estos grupos, están los grupos medios y pobres en que los analistas siguen marcando con cierta facilidad la situación cuando el reporte indica que hay reales desigualdades en cuanto a los ingresos en Estados Unidos. Hay una contracción exponencial del crecimiento a largo plazo.    Y esto lo están discutiendo otros países también. Así que antes de que se vaya, cuéntenos lo que todos queremos saber, ¿qué deberíamos hacer?, ¿qué deberíamos hacer en materia de desigualdad?  Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, lo primero es que siempre cuando hablo con la gente de negocios, lo hago porque decidimos enfrentar la desigualdad, y hacer dos cosas: he de decir, algunos cambios muy transformativos y estructurales y, por supuesto, algunos cambios diarios, en salud, pensiones, etc.  Pero entendimos que necesitábamos hacer dos o tres cosas: una era hacer una muy fuerte Reforma Educacional, porque la Educación para nosotros es esencial, en ambos sentidos, ya que permitirá no perder, como dijo el rey Abdulá, el talento de nadie. Pero también es un desafío económico, porque necesitamos mejorar toda la productividad y la competitividad mediante la innovación, más ciencia y tecnología, entre otras cosas.    Así que yo creo que todo el mundo gana cuando se tiene un capital humano que es real y fuerte, y tener la posibilidad no sólo de mejorar sus vidas, sino también contribuir a la sociedad.  Y para nosotros, para llevar a cabo eso, necesitamos cambiar la forma en que se ve la educación en nuestro país. Y sé que todo el mundo no está de acuerdo con esta intención, pero en nuestro país tenemos pleno acceso a la Educación. Todo el mundo puede tener educación a nivel primario, secundario, y a nivel terciario, por supuesto, dependerá, pero aún es limitado.  ¿Qué queremos?   No es sólo el acceso a la Educación, porque nosotros nos hacemos parte del acceso. Pero el acceso a la Educación, tal vez, es el primer paso para un país que está lejos de ese objetivo.  Pero, para un país como Chile, que es un país de ingreso medio, que tiene un montón de accesos, eso no es suficiente.  Por lo tanto, necesitamos una Educación de calidad para todos. Y la Educación de calidad para todos significa que nuestro país aún tiene que cambiar el paradigma que inspira el modelo educativo. Tenemos que asegurarnos de que la calidad de la Educación sea un derecho para todos.  En consecuencia, tenemos que resolver los problemas de dinero, porque en nuestro país, las familias deben tener dinero puede dar una buena Educación a los niños. Pero las familias que no tienen suficiente dinero reciben la Educación que pueden tener.  Así que lo que estamos tratando de hacer es una reforma que garantice una Educación de buena calidad para todos.  Y eso significa un montón de otras medidas como la gratuidad, pero, por supuesto, nos conduce a una Reforma Tributaria que acabamos de aprobar en cinco meses de gobierno. Aprobamos una Reforma Tributaria que significará un aumento del 3% del PIB y la mayor parte de esto se destinará a la Salud y la Educación, en particular, para garantizar desde la Educación Inicial, desde cero, a la Educación Terciaria, el acceso a la Educación, con un alto nivel de calidad.  Esto es lo que podemos hacer para enfrentar la desigualdad, pero también se trata de la manera de que realmente no perdamos la contribución de todos al país.   Así que es una de las cosas que he estado discutiendo muchas veces con la comunidad empresarial, porque a veces ellos ven que la Agenda es audaz y transformadora, y sienten que es una amenaza para ellos y dicen "¿sabe qué?”. La verdadera amenaza en el país es que no abordamos la desigualdad.  Lo hemos visto en todas partes del mundo. La gente está tan frustrada si ven que el PIB va en aumento, pero la calidad de vida va en descenso y lo que es peor, es una amenaza que continuemos armando disturbios sociales en una cohesión no social.    Así que lo que yo he estado tratando de hacer es cómo garantizamos que la transformación pueda realmente ir en pos de un país mejor para todos, pero llevarlo a cabo, al mismo tiempo, con una gobernanza pacífica y de la manera más constructiva.  Ése es el tipo de cambio que estamos tratando de poner en práctica, de manera completa, en mi país.