SPEECH BY H.E MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE IN FORUM “DEMONSTRATING TRANSFORMATIVE LEADERSHIP IN CLIMATE CHANGE RESPONSES IN THE CONTEXT OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT”   New York, September 22th, 2014  Dear friends:  First, I want to say how happy I am to be with all of you again, with all these wonderful women, strong leaders and also all these colleagues that are working so hard to ensure women’s empowerment and women’s human rights, as well gender opportunity and gender equality.   I feel so privileged to have this opportunity to participate and to reflect on the relationships between two many concerns of our time: climate change and gender focus.   This is a crucial debate because we know that those who are in an unfavorable and unequal position are those who the most at risk.   Where the impact of climate change is concerned, social inequalities are magnified and the majority of those are affecting are women: in crisis like Ebola but also the climate change. We know that women and children are fourteen times more likely than men to die in a nature disaster.   And we know that this vulnerability is even greater in these post-disaster periods, when is more likely to be victim of abuse and violence, often leading to avoid places of shelter or protection.   The big question is how we imagine new forms of development and how we manage to pay special attention to sectors that suffers the most negative effects of a long history of industrialization.   And many too of the answers on these brutal facts are to be found on the rural world and so it’s there that we can also concentrate efforts.     Since in many countries women play a central role in agriculture, in providing resources, in access to water or in food systems, they also are at the front of the effects of the climate change. They constitute, we constitute a 43% of the agriculture and work forces across the world and over 65% of these 400 millions of people engage livestock rising.   In my country, the situation is not very different: one third of the holdings are run by women and women account for over a 40% of the rural labor forces.  It is thus clear what this picture represents in terms of opportunities. And on one hand, we have women that are affected mostly, but the mostly are affected by climate change but also it brings and gives us a lot of opportunities. Any national and international effort that we can make to support women leaders in rural areas can be and have a significant impact on thousands of lives and on the organization of new ways of imagining development.   All that I have to say is that my country’s contribution to climate change is, if I would say, relatively minor, since we currently account for only a 0.25% of the global emissions, and it is indubitable that our responsibility is to be an active part on the solution of this problem.   And on the basis on Chilean experience, I should like to describe some initiatives that have demonstrated a potential worthy a further exploration.   Firstly, we are taking specific actions to reduce our CO2 emissions. We have made the voluntary commitment to reduce the projected emissions by 20% by 2020. And in order to do so, we are pursuing public policies to shift a cleaner and more efficient energy mix, so that by 2025 No Conventional Renewable Energies will provide 20% of our electricity.  But it also introduces, -because we just approved it, we are in six months of government- we just approved a Tax Reform that has a lot of objectives and one of them is to produce a more equitable tax situation in our country and improve, and do a very strong Education Reform and increase social protection.   But, in that reform we thought, we need to include green taxes. We need to ensure that through this reform we also include there how we can tackle some areas of climate change.  So we introduced green taxes on CO2 emissions from fixed sources with a generation capacity higher than 50 Mega Watts. We are going to reforest about 100.000 hectares of degraded soils with an investment nearly to USD 250 million. And of course, this and other measures can have a great impact and to join international efforts.   Secondly, with regards to specific programs linking gender and climate change, Chile clearly has a long way to go. However, we have gained experience as a country in order to provide support for female leadership in the rural world.   We have a training program for rural women and for institutional agriculture and livestock development, and also the foundation for the promotion and development of women. And we are promoting rural females into the entrepreneurship through a comprehensive approach.   With a three-year project, we have advanced the individual and social capacities of rural women, making them economically more independent. More than 25.000 women have been trained over some years and this year we will expand the coverage of the Program from 3.000 to 5.000 women farmers.   So the effects of such female entrepreneurship are numerous. In situation such as ongoing water shortness, the program has helped to promote new ways of tackling problems resulting from the climate change and their consequences. For example, organic farming initiatives are being encouraged in order to reduce the carbon footprint. In addition, hydroponic farming is being expanded so as to make more efficient use of water by means of recycling. Projects have been executed and the Program to improve water collection, deepening of wells and provide anti-freeze nettings to protect crops.    Another program that is being implemented by the government agencies responsible for gender policy and indigenous policy is the National Women Service -which it is a Service but we’re gonna transform into a Ministry because we believe that it has a higher status. But this Service is like a Ministry- with the National Indigenous Development Corporation with a target on indigenous women. And it is financing female entrepreneurship producing items using ancestor techniques. In addition to promote new marketing mechanisms and create a body to promote associative enterprises, this program taps a huge sources of knowledge and experience among people, that for centuries, have had different relationships with their environment.   What the two programs have in common, and that it should be highlighted, is that they use accumulated experience and female leadership to device different approaches to rural life and it is part in the local economy.  Women play a crucial role, and we all know, in agro food activities and in the protection of their environment by the vigilance and care resources, often relying on traditional knowledge of the lands. This is something that the authorities should release and promote  The main streaming on gender and environmental issues is a debt that we own not only to all women but also to our own developing strategies. We need a long term vision in which the social integration of men and women is based on the equity to construct a fairer system, here and now.   Female leaders should be presented in the corridors of political power, economic power, cultural power, and ultimately, whatever decisions affecting us or taking. Here, I should like to mention that we’re promoting a reform of the Electoral System to include quotas for being female member of the Parliament, which we hope we’ll be at least 40%.   I have to tell you when I was President last time, I could make it, it’s just I couldn’t have the support of men in Parliament. This quota of 40%, I think it is an advance but it is not enough, because it is 40% of the candidates, not 40% of the elected ones. But we just are starting in this point so we’re very happy and we hope we will have much more women in power.   Chile is a special situation.   We have a female President of the Republic.   We have a female President of Senate -she is here with us and she’s daughter of President Salvador Allende-  We have a female president of capital –she’s here, Carolina Tohá-of Santiago.   We have a female president of the biggest confederation on trade union in Chile, a female president of the two major students’ organizations of the bigger universities.   So we think it is the paradise for women… Isn’t the paradise for women!  We have a long way to go! But it’s still now is much different than before, because now we have a lot of role models that for women. So it’s also an incentive.   But I will say that we believe that all this that we’re talking about is an scenario for climate change: promoting the protection of the rights of the weakest and sharing all the burdens resulting from climate change.  And this effort has national and also international magnification so we should add for seek strategies applicable on both fronts, learning from the experiences of all nations.   I would like to end my words saying that, with AID, we’re organizing in Santiago de Chile, in next January, a big female leaders meeting with two objectives. The first of all is to make a discussion on Beijing+20, that will be on next year, but also how we can influence and make a big, I would say, an agreement on the post 2015 Agenda where gender and climate change should have very important plays.   So I would like de invite you that you come to Santiago, to Chile, because we want a lot of powerful women in politics, authorities in different levels, in the several societies. We have a lot of very strong women and, of course, we want that men too are working with us, but we want to have a very big group of people who will arise the voice very high. So the message is clear for everyone.   With political will and inclusion of all, we today have the opportunity to act to promote the gender equality and effort to combat the climate change for benefit to our nations and for a better future on our planet.   So thank you very much.   New York, September 22th, 2014  ******* DISCURSO DE S.E. LA PRESIDENTA DE LA REPÚBLICA DE CHILE, MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, EN EL FORO “DEMOSTRANDO LIDERAZGO TRANSFORMADOR EN LAS  RESPUESTAS AL CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO EN EL CONTEXTO DEL DESARROLLO SUSTENTABLE” (traducción)  Nueva York, 22 de septiembre de 2014  Amigas y amigos:  Lo primero que quiero decir es que estoy muy feliz de estar con todos ustedes una vez más, con todas estas maravillosas mujeres, líderes poderosas y todas estas colegas que están trabajando muy duro para asegurar el empoderamiento y los derechos humanos de las mujeres así como las oportunidades y la igualdad de género.   Me siento muy privilegiada de tener esta oportunidad de participar y reflexionar acerca de las relaciones entre dos grandes preocupaciones de nuestro tiempo: el cambio climático y la perspectiva de género.   Éste es un debate fundamental porque sabemos que quienes se encuentran en una posición desfavorable y desigual son aquellos que se ven más expuestos a situaciones de riesgo.   En lo que respecta al impacto del cambio climático, las desigualdades sociales se ven magnificadas y la mayoría de las afectadas son  mujeres: en crisis como el Ébola, pero también el cambio climático. Sabemos que las mujeres y los niños tienen 14 veces más probabilidades que los hombres de morir en un desastre natural.  Y sabemos que esta vulnerabilidad es incluso más alta en las etapas posteriores a estas catástrofes, donde aumentan sus posibilidades de ser víctima de abusos y violencia, lo que las lleva muchas veces a que eviten los lugares de refugio o protección.  La gran pregunta es cómo concebimos nuevas formas de desarrollo y cómo nos encargamos de dar especial atención a los sectores que más resienten los efectos negativos de una larga historia de industrialización.  Y gran parte de las respuestas a estas brutales cifras se encuentran en el mundo rural y por eso es que acá podemos también concentrar parte importante de los esfuerzos.    Dado que en muchos países las mujeres desempeñan un papel central en la agricultura, en la provisión de recursos, en el acceso al agua o en los sistemas de alimentación, ellas también se encuentran al frente de los efectos del cambio climático. Ellas constituyen, nosotras constituimos, un 43% de los trabajos agrícolas en el mundo y más del 65% de estas 400 millones de personas se dedican a la ganadería.  En mi país, la situación no es muy diferente: un tercio de las explotaciones campesinas son dirigidas por mujeres y las mujeres corresponden a más del 40% de la mano de obra campesina.  Por tanto, es claro lo que esta imagen representa en términos de oportunidades. Y, por un lado, tenemos las mujeres que se ven afectadas en su mayoría, aunque la mayoría de ellas se ven afectadas por el cambio climático, pero que también nos trae y da una gran cantidad de oportunidades. Cualquier esfuerzo nacional e internacional que podamos hacer para apoyar a las mujeres líderes en las zonas rurales puede ser y tener un impacto significativo en miles de vidas y en la organización de nuevas formas de concebir el desarrollo.  Tengo que decir que la contribución de mi país al cambio climático es, yo diría, relativamente menor, ya que actualmente representamos sólo un 0,25% de las emisiones globales, y es indudable que nuestra responsabilidad es ser parte activa de la solución de este problema.  Y sobre la base de la experiencia chilena, me gustaría describir algunas iniciativas que han demostrado un potencial digno de una exploración más profunda.  En primer lugar, estamos tomando medidas específicas para reducir las emisiones de CO2. Hemos hecho el compromiso voluntario de reducir las emisiones proyectadas en un 20% en el 2020. Y para ello, estamos llevando a cabo políticas públicas para transitar hacia una matriz energética más limpia y eficiente, por lo que las Energías Renovables No Convencionales aportarán el 20% de nuestra electricidad.  Pero también establece -ya que acabamos de aprobarla, estamos en seis meses de gobierno- acabamos de aprobar una Reforma Tributaria que tiene muchos objetivos y uno de ellos es el de producir una situación fiscal más equitativa en nuestro país, y mejorar y hacer una fuerte Reforma Educacional y aumentar la protección social.  Pero, en la reforma que pensamos, necesitamos incluir los impuestos ecológicos. Tenemos que asegurarnos de que a través de esta reforma también incluyamos cómo podemos enfrentar a algunas áreas del cambio climático.   Así que hemos introducido impuestos ecológicos sobre las emisiones de CO2 procedentes de fuentes fijas con una capacidad de generación superior a 50 Mega Watts. Vamos a reforestar alrededor de 100.000 hectáreas de suelos degradados con una inversión cercana a los USD 250 millones. Y por supuesto, ésta y otras medidas pueden tener un gran impacto y se unirán a los esfuerzos internacionales.  En segundo lugar, en lo que respecta a los programas específicos de género y el cambio climático, Chile tiene claramente un largo camino por recorrer. Sin embargo, hemos adquirido experiencia como país con el fin de brindar apoyo al liderazgo de la mujer en el mundo rural.  Tenemos un programa de capacitación para las mujeres campesinas y para la agricultura institucional y desarrollo de la ganadería, así como las bases para la promoción y desarrollo de las mujeres. Y estamos promoviendo a las mujeres campesinas en emprendimientos a través de un enfoque integral.  Con un proyecto de tres años, hemos avanzado en las capacidades individuales y sociales de las mujeres campesinas, haciéndolas económicamente más independientes. Más de 25.000 mujeres han recibido capacitación durante varios años y este año vamos a ampliar la cobertura del Programa de 3,000 a 5,000 mujeres agricultoras.  Así que los efectos de dicho emprendimiento femenino son numerosos. En situaciones como el constante déficit hídrico, el programa ha ayudado a promover nuevas formas de abordar las problemáticas resultantes del cambio climático y sus consecuencias. Por ejemplo, se están fomentando iniciativas de producción agrícola orgánica con el fin de reducir la huella de carbono. Además, se está aumentando el cultivo hidropónico para hacer un uso más eficiente de las aguas mediante su reciclado. Se han ejecutado proyectos y el programa para mejorar la recolección de aguas, la profundización de pozos y proporcionar mallas anti-heladas para proteger los cultivos.  Otro programa que está siendo implementado por las agencias gubernamentales responsables de la política de género y la política indígena es el Servicio Nacional de la Mujer (SERNAM)-que es un Servicio, pero que vamos a transformar en Ministerio, porque creemos que tiene un estatus más alto. Pero este servicio es como un Ministerio- junto con la Corporación Nacional de Desarrollo Indígena (CONADI) enfocada en las mujeres indígenas. Y se están financiando productos de emprendimiento femenino que utilizan técnicas de sus antepasados. Además de fomentar nuevos mecanismos de comercialización y crear un organismo para promover las empresas asociativas, este programa permite recuperar enormes fuentes de conocimientos y experiencias entre las personas, que durante siglos, han tenido diferentes relaciones con su entorno.  Entonces, lo que los dos programas tienen en común, y que hay que destacar, es que utilizan la experiencia acumulada y el liderazgo femenino para articular diferentes enfoques de la vida rural y que es parte de la economía local.  Las mujeres desempeñan un papel crucial, y todos lo sabemos, en las actividades agroalimentarias y en la protección de su medio ambiente a través de recursos de vigilancia y atención, a menudo apoyándose en el conocimiento tradicional de las tierras. Esto es algo que las autoridades deben rescatar y promover.   Los temas primordiales en cuestiones ambientales y de género son una deuda que tenemos no sólo con todas las mujeres, sino también con nuestras propias estrategias de desarrollo. Necesitamos una visión de largo plazo en la que la integración social de los hombres y las mujeres se base en la equidad para construir un sistema más justo, aquí y ahora.  Porque el liderazgo de las mujeres debe estar presente en los círculos del poder político, del poder económico, del poder cultural y, en última instancia, en cualquiera de las decisiones que podamos tomar o que nos afecten. Aquí, me gustaría mencionar que estamos promoviendo una Reforma al Sistema Electoral para incluir cuotas para las mujeres miembros del Parlamento, que esperamos que sea al menos del 40%.  Tengo que contarles que cuando fui Presidenta la última vez, pude hacerlo, sólo que no pude contar con el apoyo de los hombres en el Parlamento. Esta cuota del 40%, creo que es un avance, pero no es suficiente, ya que es el 40% de los candidatos, no el 40% de los elegidos. Pero recién estamos empezando en este punto, así que estamos muy contentos y esperamos tener mucho más mujeres en el poder.  Chile tiene una situación especial.   Tenemos una mujer Presidenta de la República.   Tenemos una mujer presidenta del Senado –que está aquí con nosotros y es hija del Presidente Salvador Allende-.  Tenemos una mujer alcaldesa de Santiago –ella está aquí, Carolina Toha-.  Tenemos una mujer presidenta de la confederación más grande de sindicatos de Chile; una mujer presidenta de dos de las principales  organizaciones estudiantiles de las universidades más grandes.   Así que creo que es el paraíso para las mujeres… ¡No, no es el paraíso para las mujeres! (risas)   ¡Tenemos un largo camino que recorrer! pero aun así es muy diferente a lo que era, porque ahora tenemos una gran cantidad de modelos de rol para las mujeres. Así que eso también es un incentivo.   Pero he de decir que creemos que todo esto que estamos hablando es un escenario del cambio climático: promover la protección de los derechos de los más débiles y compartir todas las cargas resultantes del cambio climático.  Y este esfuerzo tiene dimensiones nacionales e internacionales por lo que debemos sumarnos para buscar estrategias aplicables en ambos frentes, aprendiendo de las experiencias de todas las naciones.  Me gustaría terminar mis palabras diciendo que, con ayuda internacional, estamos organizando en Santiago de Chile, en enero próximo, una gran reunión de líderes femeninas para cumplir con dos objetivos. El primero de ellos es el de discutir sobre Beijing + 20, que será el próximo año, pero también acerca de cómo podemos influir y lograr un gran, yo diría, acuerdo respecto a la Agenda 2015 en donde la perspectiva de género y el cambio climático deberían tener importantes roles.   Así que me gustaría invitarlos para que vayan a Santiago, a Chile, porque queremos ver a un montón de mujeres poderosas en la política, autoridades de diferentes niveles, de diversas sociedades. Tenemos una gran cantidad de mujeres poderosas y, por supuesto, queremos que los hombres también trabajen con nosotras, pero queremos tener un gran grupo de personas que levante la voz muy alto. Así que el mensaje es claro para todo el mundo.  Con voluntad política y la inclusión de todos, hoy tenemos la oportunidad de actuar para promover la igualdad de género y la lucha contra el cambio climático para el beneficio de nuestras naciones y de un futuro mejor en nuestro planeta.  Muchas gracias.   Nueva York, 22 de septiembre de 2014