Versión original en inglés   Dear Friends:   The truth is that I am very glad to be here, for my first time, in the Philippines, and to join you in the National Women Summit, and I understand the fourth since the Women and Gender Institute of the Miriam College began organizing this important meeting on 2009.   I am really grateful for this opportunity to exchange ideas and experiences about issues that are very important to me, such as closing the gender gap and political participation of women. From the different areas in which I have developed my life in public service, including the Presidency of my country and the executive direction of UN Women, a central role has been given to action and reflection on these issues.   And I say these are very important issues because I am convinced that the economic and human development of our peoples, as well as the consolidation of our democratic systems, depend greatly upon them.   Nothing more, nothing less!   And I hope that this conversation, and the remaining sessions that will take place in the Summit, will reinforce both men and women’s commitment - because men must also be a part of this struggle - with women rights and empowerment, strengthening the bonds that unite us, and inspiring us to work with even more conviction to achieve these goals, that go beyond territorial borders.   There is no doubt that this Summit comes at the right moment, precisely when the international community commemorates events of great importance that defined the development of the fight for gender equality.   Among others, I wanna remember the 40th Anniversary of the First World Conference on Women in Mexico City, the 20th Anniversary of the celebrated Fourth World Conference of Beijing, and the 15th Anniversary of Security Council Resolution 1325 on Peace and Security and Women.   These milestones made a contribution in creating awareness of the need to work decisively to close the unacceptable gender gaps that still persist.   We have certainly made great progress in these four decades, beginning with recognizing the important role women have historically played their contributions to humanity’s progress, to the struggle for the freedom of our peoples, and to the creation of a just, peaceful and prosperous world.   Until recently, this contribution was intentionally silenced, or was overshadowed by the feats of great men.   Today, no one can omit them.   Today, for example, no one doubts the importance of Manuela Sáenz, an Ecuadorian who was not only Simón Bolivar’s partner, but also shined with her own light as a leader in Latin American Independence.   Today, no one doubts the role played by the women of the Katipunan in the Philippine Revolution of 1896, or the contribution of the Katipuneras of Miriam College in the fight against the Marcos dictatorship.   No one, or very few, doubt the great contribution of our predecessors, those who were the driving force behind the feminine and feminist movements, who also acted as promoters of Human Rights.  Women such as Hermila Galindo, in Mexico, Librada Avelino, here in the Philippines, Amanda Labarca, in my country, or Eleanor Roosevelt in the United States, to name a few examples.   And, certainly, we must recognize Leticia Ramos-Shahani, who has made such an important contribution to the struggle for equity and justice, in Philippines but also at the global level. She has been, among others, as she mentioned, secretary general of the Third World Conference on Women, held in Nairobi in 1985, and an outstanding officer of the United Nations, as well as ambassador, senator and the head of delegation of the Philippines in the Beijing Conference. So, thank you senator, for the contribution that you have made for women empowerment and women equality.   In addition to this progress in the recognition of our role in history, we are also moving forward in the recognition of the daily efforts and contributions of thousands of millions of women, building development, educating themselves and others, creating networks for others, work that is normally unacknowledged and overburdened. This is why we can observe important advancements in these last four decades worldwide in terms of everyday rights for women in health, education, non-discrimination, security, pensions and political participation.   But I would like to specially acknowledge the progress in The Philippines. At this moment, The Philippines is the only country in Asia that has been able to completely close the gender gap in education, and health, and it’s the only one placed in the top ten of the Global Gender Gap Report of 2014, produced by the World Economic Forum.   According to this same report, Philippines is ranked 24 globally in economic participation and 17 in women’s political empowerment, and it is the country with the highest percentage of firms owned by women.   These data is truly remarkable, and I congratulate you.   However, I can imagine it’s not the paradise for women, because I have the experience in my country being female President, having last year a female president in the Senate, a female president of the Federation of the Unions, two female presidents of the biggest Federation of Students -from two biggest universities- but still paradise doesn’t exist in Chile for women. We still have a lot of issues; we still have a difficult piece of obstruction and a difficulty to get private and one day to mechanisms on banks and financial institutions. I mean differences between men and women to access. We still have violence against women; we still have poverty in our country, we still have to save women and children. So there are a lot of different challenges that my country faces. And I can imagine that even you have advanced a lot, and that’s fantastic, you still have a lot of challenges that you’re continuing working on.    So, because I would say that however this progress that can also be seen – though maybe on a smaller scale – in other countries, the gap between men and women still persists and has even increased in some areas. There are also existing challenges related with gender violence, maternal mortality and the feminization of poverty.   For example, close to 800 women die every day in the world due to complications during birth. In my region, Latin America and the Caribbean, 9,300 women die every year of pregnancy related causes.   In many regions, we have managed to significantly reduce poverty, but increasingly poverty seems to have the face of a woman. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization, in the last decades female poverty has increase in Latin America, currently afflicting 117 women for every 100 men.   So we cannot allow these trends to go on, mortgaging the future of women and, with them, the future of our boys, girls and of our peoples.   We also have pending challenges in education. One example of this – I am talking about the world- is that approximately two thirds of the 770 million illiterate people in the world are still women.   And there are also unfinished tasks in regards salary gaps, access of women to job markets, female participation in management positions in public and private enterprises, and political participation, among others.   This last issue is particularly relevant. It is fundamental that we ourselves promote our interests in the public arena, and fight to increase our rights. Women have to be where decisions that affect women and public life are made.   And it is also necessary that we contribute, through concrete actions, through direct participation, to the progress of our societies and the strengthening of our democracies.   As Leticia Ramos Shahani said during the Beijing Conference: “We must lead, not only follow. We must be the doctor who can heal and cure, and not be just the patient. We must be catalysts and initiators of change, and not just be seekers of the status quo.” And I think this quote is a fantastic quote of Madame Ramos Sahani.   When I was the female director of UN Women -this new organization that you have created to put together a lot of diferent organization who works for women rights, so to give more strenght and capacity- and so we worked with discussing with a lot of women all over the world, sometimes on peace and security, sometimes on other issues, I remember talking to some women who told me “it is not enough to me to be seated at the table of discussion. I want to decide the shape of design of the table that I’m gonna visit it at”. And I think that’s real difference.    So I am convinced that, if we manage to be present in the spheres of power and decision making, we’ll have greater possibilities to influence and promote the necessary transformation of laws and practices; not only laws because in almost every country of the world, we have enough laws, but the implementation of those laws give the necessary findings to those laws, it’s something completely different, so sometimes laws are there, but reality something else, so we need to set these laws are working for women. So we will have, as I said, to make the necessary transformation of laws and practices in a way that allows us to close gender gaps and break down barriers that limit our opportunities. In this way we will also be enhancing an inclusive and sustainable development.    In this matter, as in others, there has been important progress such as women’s voting during the XX century – that was achieved early here in the Philippines, in 1937 – and other significant advances. But the political participation of women continues to be too low in the world.   For example, since 1995, women Heads of Government went from 7 – in the entire world – to 15, women Heads of State increased from 3 to nine, and members of parliaments went from 11.3% to 21.8%.   And you were surprised but I was on this on the center of my country. I was the fifth minister of Defense in the world history, it’s not what I feel proud about this, and it’s how the battle that they saw as before, I have to say. I mean after that I was minister of Defense, many of the countries promoted the women as minister of Defense, so we need to have this symbolic possibility and say “well, we have women there and -you know- we haven’t had wars, they’ve been doing right, it’s OK, they can” so this kind of example helps other people to make decisions that probably they didn’t there to do before that. But on the other hand, we had it in few of states and few of the governments.   On the other hand, in recent years in Latin America and the Caribbean there has been a surge of female leadership. We currently have three women Presidents – in Brazil, Argentina and Chile; and until two years we had also one in Costa Rica, I wasn’t there, but she was there- and two Prime Ministers – Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago.   Simultaneously, we’ve seen a sustained – but clearly insufficient – increase in the participation of women in parliaments. The regional average is of 25.2%, which exceeds the world average (22.5%) but is considerably below that of the Nordic countries that reaches 42.1%.   Meanwhile, according to data published by the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Philippines has approximately a 26% rate of female participation, which it is better than the average for Asia that is of 18.4%. But I was asked in the morning –in early morning we had a breakfast with female Philippine leaders- and I was asked on how is the rate of female in the population and I said that it’s around 51%. So even though it is better, and we can do much better, we need to increase women political participation, so we believe that it would mean our democracy will be better represented in terms of what our society is. I will tell you this not because in Chile we’re doing very well in this field, we’ve done very badly in this field. In my country, the participation of women in both Chambers in the Congress is of a scarce 16% which places Chile among the worst placed in Latin America.   This is certainly a situation that we want to – and will – change. Because we just approved in January of this year, we changed our elector system and for the first time I was able to -because in my first turn I tried to do and change it- we approved a law that 40% of candidate have to be female. We have other conditions: political parties, who won’t inscribe 40% of women, won’t be able to inscribe any candidate. So it’s the must, “it’s not please, it’s a must”. But as there are many women who are working on women rights we all know that they can be fooled, isn’t? You can put female candidates in place where they’ll never be elected, I know that. Many years ago, I was invited to be candidate in a municipality, of course, I mean, my political party had 2% of the votes, so there weren’t chances, no choices, that because we always say “OK, I do it, it is important” and I went I had 2% of the votes. So afterwards, when I went for the Presidency and I got, I said them “see what you lost?” That was joking, of course. That was joking. But, I mean, I said that, but I was joking, that what I mean.   So I would say because we know that you can always try to solve it, you know, a lot of moved away, that is a little legal and then put women out of the possibilities. So that’s why we said that if you won’t inscribe 40% of women, you won’t be inscribe any inscribe candidate at all”. But on the other hand, there’s an incentive. Because we won’t want only candidates, we want women elected, I could get 40% of elected, that would be too ambitious, but Parliament allowed me that, so I said “parties who elect more women, they will have financial contribution”. So this is a stimulated thing, incentive, it should be more incentive, but the truth is that it doesn’t happen just for money, that’s is an important thing.   So because we know that in context such as this one, when our voices have limited strength, and our interests tend to be unattended, our democracy lacks the strength and legitimacy that our society and economy demand.   So I believe that having women empowered in our country is good for women but it’s also good for whole society. So I am convinced of that.   In order to resolve this and other problems of our political system, as I mentioned, we have put forwards and adopted – not very long ago – a democratizing reform that establishes a proportional electoral system that is more representative and inclusive, and that includes a law on gender quotas in order to promote women’s participation in legislative electoral processes.   We know very well –thanks to the international evidence- that quotas in many places have been the only proven mechanism that increases female participation at the parliamentary level. In fact, the countries that have implemented this mechanism –in one of its variations, because there are different kinds of it- have an average of 24% of female parliamentarians, while the ones that have not made it have an average lower than 15%. In other countries, they even include something that I would like to get in our country is that they put a zebra system, so they have a man and a woman or a woman and a man, because in some of these places, they waited to full the system and they put women in the end of the list. So people vote for the first, for the second and never count them. We always have been looking at the details, you know, and I don’t, but in my country, we said “the devil but his tail”, because then you can find how to trip things, you know.   Well, in Chile, the quotas law, as I mentioned, will allow us to ensure that at least 40% of the candidates to the Congress are women.   In order to reach that goal, we have sanctions for everybody doesn’t respect it.   In this way, on the next election that it will be elected in 2017, we will have more candidates and I hope so also more elected women parliamentarians, who will amplify the voice of Chilean women and contribute to the creation of the inclusive, democratic and developed Chile that we all aspire to.   Dear friends:   I want to conclude my words -because we will an interaction I know, a dialogue- by emphasizing one of the core ideas that I have tried to transmit today: firstly I would say women can and we can in all fields from social, of course, we are a lot of women and in the social field, in the work field, of course women at home, in the academia and so on. But also in politics, in Defense, in many other areas. But women can in banks, women can in Justice, in all areas.   But I would like to transmit the full participation of women is not only crucial for the extension of rights, the reduction of gaps and the autonomy of women themselves, but it is also crucial for the strengthening of our political institutions and the comprehensive, economic and human development of our people.   We have to be aware that a political system that excludes, or does not properly include, such a big part of the population –around 50%- cannot be seen as democratic, and it will be have difficulties to have the sturdiness and legitimacy that our countries need to fully develop.   One of the things that every time talking about quota or increasing women or female participation is that always the discussion is “well, we don’t need quota, we need good people there”. And I always ask myself “but it’s always about people, prepared people, being men or women, why this discussion appear when we are talking about women?” I mean, it has to be always all the candidates have to be people who are good, ethically good, prepared to do what they have to do. So this is something that appeared in this discussion.   Because I am sure in every country that many and many, a lot of women, who are well-prepared, who has their cost, they believe in high principles and values and they want through politics to be able to develop is objective in their lives, but they need a support that they don’t have. A quota, many times, in societies, but not in the Philippines. But in many societies, the political parties don’t include women usually in the lists that they can’t be supported to have.   But I always ask somebody, I mean; I know football is not a sport which in Philippines will be the most favorite, but, maybe basketball then? Can you imagine a basketball game with half of the players? It is impossible. It’s more the same is happening in our countries, indeed. If you have the half of the team, that is not fully participating, you will never be able, not only to win the game, to win what you have to put objectives as a country in terms of sustainable development, in terms of democracy, in terms of fighting corruption, in terms of more transparency, etcetera, etcetera.   So, ultimately, if we want that our people to be more prosperous, our societies fairer and our democracies more robust and legitimate, we have to bet on inclusion, equity and the political participation of women.   I think it´s that simple and clear.   Dear friends,   There is no doubt that we have achieved substantial progress in matters of equality and empowerment of women during these 40 years since the First World Conference on Women, but there are still many barriers and prejudices to break down and a long way to go.   If we want to accelerate the pace and advance toward the equitable, peaceful and prosperous society that we all aspire to, we must double our efforts today. Because as that notable promoter of human rights Eleanor Roosevelt said: “It is today that we must create the world of the future”.   I trust that this event will contribute to achieve these goals.   Thank you very much.    Traducción     Queridos amigos:   La verdad es que estoy muy contenta de estar aquí, por primera vez, en Filipinas, para unirme a ustedes en la Cumbre Nacional de la Mujer, que entiendo es la Cuarta desde que el Instituto de la Mujer y de Género del Miriam College comenzó a organizar esta importante reunión en 2009.   Estoy de verdad muy agradecida por esta oportunidad de intercambiar ideas y experiencias sobre temas que son muy importantes para mí, como el cierre de la brecha de género y la participación política de las mujeres. Desde las diferentes áreas en las que he desarrollado mi vida en el servicio público, incluyendo la Presidencia de mi país y la Dirección Ejecutiva de ONU Mujeres, he dado un rol central a la acción y la reflexión sobre estos temas.   Y digo que éstos son temas muy importantes porque estoy convencida de que el desarrollo económico y humano de nuestros pueblos, así como la consolidación de nuestros sistemas democráticos, dependen en gran medida de ellos.   ¡Nada más nada menos!   Y espero que esta conversación, y las sesiones restantes, que tendrán lugar en la Cumbre, refuerce el compromiso tanto de hombres como mujeres - porque los hombres también deben ser parte de esta lucha - con los derechos de las mujeres y el empoderamiento, el fortalecimiento de los lazos que nos unen, inspirándonos a trabajar con más convicción para lograr estos objetivos, que van más allá de las fronteras territoriales.   No hay duda de que esta Cumbre llega en el momento justo, precisamente cuando la Comunidad Internacional conmemora acontecimientos de gran importancia que definieron el desarrollo de la lucha por la igualdad de género.   Entre otros, quiero recordar el 40° Aniversario de la Primera Conferencia Mundial sobre la Mujer de la Ciudad de México, el 20° Aniversario de la Célebre Cuarta Conferencia Mundial de Beijing, y el 15° Aniversario de la Resolución 1325 del Consejo de Seguridad sobre Paz y Seguridad y las Mujeres.   Estos hitos contribuyeron en la creación de conciencia sobre la necesidad de trabajar con decisión para cerrar las inaceptables brechas de género que aún persisten.   Sin duda, hemos hecho un gran progreso en estas cuatro décadas, comenzando con el reconocimiento del importante rol que las mujeres han desempeñado históricamente, sus contribuciones al progreso de la humanidad, a la lucha por la libertad de nuestros pueblos, y a la creación de un mundo justo, pacífico y próspero.   Hasta hace poco, esta contribución fue silenciada deliberadamente, o se vio ensombrecida por las hazañas de grandes hombres.   Hoy en día, nadie puede omitirlas.   Hoy, por ejemplo, nadie duda de la importancia de Manuela Sáenz, una ecuatoriana que no sólo fue compañera de Simón Bolívar, sino que también brilló con luz propia como líder en la Independencia Latinoamericana.   Hoy en día, nadie duda del rol desempeñado por las mujeres de la Katipunan en la Revolución Filipina de 1896, o la contribución de las Katipuneras de Miriam College en la lucha contra la dictadura de Marcos.   Nadie, o muy pocos, dudan de la gran contribución de nuestras antecesoras, quienes fueron la fuerza impulsora detrás de los movimientos femeninos y feministas, que también actuaron como promotoras de los Derechos Humanos. Mujeres como Hermila Galindo, en México; Librada Avelino, aquí en Filipinas; Amanda Labarca, en mi país; o Eleanor Roosevelt en los Estados Unidos, por citar algunos ejemplos.   Y, desde luego, hay que reconocer a Leticia Ramos Shahani, quien ha hecho una contribución tan importante a la lucha por la equidad y la justicia, en Filipinas y en el plano mundial. Ha sido, entre otros, como ella mencionó, secretaria general de la Tercera Conferencia Mundial sobre la Mujer, celebrada en Nairobi en 1985, y una oficial sobresaliente de las Naciones Unidas, así como embajadora, senadora y jefa de la delegación de Filipinas en la Conferencia de Beijing. Así que, muchas gracias senadora, por la contribución que usted ha hecho al empoderamiento y a la igualdad de las mujeres.   Además de este avance en el reconocimiento de nuestro rol en la historia, también estamos avanzando en el reconocimiento de los esfuerzos y contribuciones diarias de miles de millones de mujeres, construyendo el desarrollo, la educación de sí mismas y de otras, la creación de redes para las demás mujeres; trabajo que es, normalmente, no reconocido y sobrecargado. Es por esto que podemos observar importantes avances en estas últimas cuatro décadas en todo el mundo en términos de derechos diarios para las mujeres en salud, educación, la no discriminación, seguridad, pensiones y participación política.   Pero me gustaría reconocer especialmente los avances en Filipinas. En este momento, Filipinas es el único país de Asia que ha sido capaz de cerrar completamente la brecha de género en educación y salud, y es el único que se coloca en el Top Ten del Global Gender Gap Report 2014, elaborado por el Foro Económico Mundial.   Según este mismo informe, Filipinas ocupa el puesto 24 a nivel mundial en participación económica y el 17 en el empoderamiento político de las mujeres, y es el país con mayor porcentaje de empresas que son propiedad de mujeres.   Estos datos son verdaderamente notables, y los felicito.   Sin embargo, me imagino que no es el paraíso para las mujeres, porque tengo experiencia en mi país siendo Presidenta, teniendo el año pasado una presidenta en el Senado, una presidenta de la federación de sindicatos, dos presidentas de las más grandes federaciones de estudiantes -de las dos más grandes universidades- pero aún no hay un paraíso en Chile para las mujeres. Todavía tenemos un montón de cuestiones, todavía tenemos problemas de obstrucción y dificultad en el ámbito privado; un día, son los mecanismos para llegar a los bancos e instituciones financieras. Me refiero a las diferencias que hay entre hombres y mujeres en el acceso. Todavía tenemos violencia contra la mujer; todavía tenemos  pobreza en nuestro país, todavía tenemos que proteger a las mujeres y a los niños. Así que hay una gran cantidad de desafíos a los que se enfrenta mi país. Y me imagino que a pesar de que ustedes han avanzado mucho, y eso es fantástico; todavía tienen una gran cantidad de desafíos en los que siguen trabajando.   Así que yo diría que, a pesar de este progreso, que también se puede ver - aunque en menor escala - en otros países, la brecha entre hombres y mujeres aún persiste e incluso ha aumentado en algunas zonas. También hay desafíos existentes relacionados con la violencia de género, la mortalidad materna y la feminización de la pobreza.   Por ejemplo, cerca de 800 mujeres mueren cada día en el mundo debido a complicaciones durante el parto. En mi región, América Latina y el Caribe, 9 mil 300 mujeres mueren cada año por causas relacionadas con el embarazo.   En muchas regiones, hemos logrado reducir significativamente la pobreza, pero la pobreza cada vez parece tener cara de mujer. De acuerdo con la Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Alimentación y la Agricultura, en las últimas décadas la pobreza femenina se ha incrementado en América Latina, que actualmente aflige a 117 mujeres por cada 100 hombres.   De manera que no podemos permitir que estas tendencias continúen, hipotecando el futuro de las mujeres y, con ellas, el futuro de nuestros niños, niñas y de nuestros pueblos.   También tenemos desafíos pendientes en materia de educación. Un ejemplo de esto – y estoy hablando a nivel mundial- es que aproximadamente dos tercios de los 770 millones de analfabetos en el mundo todavía son mujeres.   Y también hay tareas pendientes respecto a las brechas salariales, el acceso de las mujeres a los mercados de trabajo, la participación femenina en los puestos de Dirección en las empresas públicas y privadas y la participación política, entre otros.   Este último tema es particularmente relevante. Es fundamental que nosotras mismas fomentemos nuestros intereses en el ámbito público, y luchemos para aumentar nuestros derechos. Las mujeres tienen que estar donde se toman las decisiones que afectan a la mujer y la vida pública.   Y también es necesario que contribuyamos, a través de acciones concretas, a través de la participación directa, al progreso de nuestras sociedades y al fortalecimiento de nuestras democracias.   Como dijo Leticia Ramos Shahani durante la Conferencia de Beijing: "Hay que liderar, no sólo seguir. Debemos ser la doctora que puede sanar y curar, y no ser simplemente la paciente. Debemos ser catalizadoras e iniciadoras del cambio, y no sólo ser buscadoras del status quo". Y creo que ésta es una fantástica cita de la Señora Ramos Sahani.   Cuando yo era directora de ONU Mujeres -esta nueva organización que se ha creado para reunir a diferentes organizaciones que trabajan por los derechos de las mujeres, de manera de darle más fuerza y capacidad-  y trabajé en la discusión con una gran cantidad de mujeres de todo el mundo, a veces sobre paz y seguridad, a veces en otras cuestiones, recuerdo haber hablado con algunas mujeres que me dijeron que "no es suficiente para mí sentarme a la mesa de discusión. Yo quiero decidir la forma y el diseño de la mesa, eso es por lo que vine". Y creo que eso hace la real diferencia.   Estoy convencida de que, si logramos estar presentes en las esferas de poder y toma de decisiones, tendremos mayores posibilidades de influir y promover la necesaria transformación de las leyes y la práctica; no sólo las leyes, porque en casi todos los países del mundo tenemos suficientes leyes, pero la aplicación de esas leyes dan los resultados necesarios para esas leyes; es algo completamente diferente, así que a veces las leyes están ahí, pero la realidad es otra, por lo que necesitamos establecer que estas leyes trabajen para las mujeres. De esta manera, tendremos que, como decía, hacer las transformaciones necesarias que de alguna forma nos permita cerrar las brechas de género y romper las barreras que limitan nuestras oportunidades. De esta forma, también estaremos mejorando un desarrollo inclusivo y sostenible.   En este aspecto, como en otros, se han producido avances importantes, como el sufragio de las mujeres durante el siglo XX - que se logró temprano aquí en Filipinas, en 1937- y otros avances significativos. Pero la participación política de las mujeres sigue siendo demasiado baja en el mundo.   Por ejemplo, desde 1995, las mujeres Jefas de Gobierno pasaron de 7 - en todo el mundo - a 15, las mujeres Jefas de Estado aumentaron de 3 a 9, y las miembros de los Parlamentos pasaron de 11.3% a 21.8%.   Y ustedes se sorprendieron pero yo estuve en el centro de esto en mi país. Yo fui la quinta ministra de Defensa en la historia del mundo, no es lo que me sienta orgullosa de eso, sino es la forma en que se veían las guerras antes, tengo que decir. Me refiero a que después de que fui ministra de Defensa, muchos de los países promovieron a mujeres como ministras de Defensa, por lo que necesitamos es tener esta posibilidad simbólica y decir "bueno, tenemos mujeres allí y -usted saben- no hemos tenido guerras, ellas lo están haciendo bien, está bien, ellas pueden" por lo que este tipo de ejemplo ayuda a otras personas a tomar decisiones que, probablemente, no habrían podido tomar antes. Pero, por otro lado, esto lo teníamos en algunos Estados y algunos de los Gobiernos.   Por otro lado, en los últimos años en América Latina y el Caribe se ha producido una oleada de liderazgo femenino. Actualmente tenemos 3   Presidentas - en Brasil, Argentina y Chile; y hasta hace dos años, tuvimos una en Costa Rica, yo no estuve ahí, pero ella sí- y 2 Primeras Ministras - Jamaica y Trinidad y Tobago.   Al mismo tiempo, hemos visto un sostenido –aunque claramente insuficiente- aumento de la participación de las mujeres en los Parlamentos. El promedio regional es de 25,2%, lo que supera el promedio mundial (22,5%), pero es considerablemente inferior al de los países nórdicos que alcanza el 42,1%.   Mientras tanto, según los datos publicados por la Unión Interparlamentaria, Filipinas tiene aproximadamente una tasa de 26% de participación femenina, lo que es mejor que la media de Asia, que es del 18,4%. Pero me estaban preguntando por la mañana -en la mañana temprano, tuvimos un desayuno con líderes filipinas- y me estaban preguntando cuál es la tasa de mujeres en la población y dije que es alrededor de un 51%. Así que, aunque es mejor ahora, y podemos hacerlo mucho mejor, tenemos que aumentar la participación política de las mujeres, porque creemos que esto significaría que nuestra democracia estaría mejor representada en términos de lo que nuestra sociedad es. Les diré que esto no es porque en Chile estemos haciéndolo muy bien en este campo, lo hemos hecho muy mal en este campo. En mi país, la participación de las mujeres en ambas cámaras en el Congreso es de un escaso 16%, lo que ubica a Chile entre los peores colocados en América Latina.   Ésta es, sin duda, una situación que queremos -y anhelamos- cambiar. Porque acabamos de aprobar en enero de este año y hemos cambiado nuestro sistema electoral y por primera vez tuve la oportunidad -porque en mi primer Gobierno traté de hacerlo y cambiarlo- aprobamos una ley en la que el 40% de los candidatos tienen que ser mujeres. Tenemos otras dos condiciones: los partidos políticos que no inscriban 40% de las mujeres, no podrán inscribir a ningún candidato. Así que es un deber, “no es un favor, es un deber". Pero ya que hay muchas mujeres que están trabajando en los derechos de las mujeres, todos sabemos que pueden ser engañadas, ¿no es así? Ustedes pueden poner las candidatas en un lugar en el que nunca van a ser elegidas, yo lo sé. Hace muchos años, me invitaron a ser candidata en un municipio, por supuesto, quiero decir, mi partido político obtuvo un 2% de los votos, por lo que no hubo posibilidades, no hubo opciones, pero siempre decimos "OK, lo haré, es importante", y fui tuve 2% de los votos. Así que después, cuando fui por la Presidencia y gané, les dije "¿ven lo que se perdieron?" Ésa fue una broma, por supuesto, fue una broma. Pero, quiero decir, lo dije, pero yo estaba bromeando, eso es lo que quiero decir.   Así que yo diría, porque sabemos que siempre se puede tratar de resolverlo, ya sabes, muchas que son desplazadas, lo que es poco legal y así ponen a las mujeres lejos de las posibilidades. Así que por eso dijimos que “si ustedes no van a inscribir 40% de las mujeres, no podrán inscribir ningún". Pero, por otro lado, hay un incentivo. Porque no queremos sólo candidatas, queremos mujeres electas, yo podría lograr un 40% de electas, pero eso sería demasiado ambicioso, pero el Parlamento me lo permitió y señalé que "los partidos que elijan más mujeres, tendrán contribuciones financieras”. Así que esto es un estímulo, un incentivo, debe ser más bien un incentivo, pero es que no debería darse sólo por dinero, eso es una cosa importante.   Porque sabemos que en un contexto como éste, cuando nuestras voces tienen una fuerza limitada, y nuestros intereses tienden a ser desatendidos, nuestra democracia carece de la fuerza y la legitimidad que nuestra sociedad y la economía demandan.   Así que creo que tener mujeres empoderadas en nuestro país es bueno para las mujeres, pero también es bueno para la sociedad entera. Por lo tanto, estoy convencida de ello.   Con el fin de resolver éste y otros problemas de nuestro sistema político, como mencioné, hemos puesto delante y adoptado -no hace mucho tiempo- una reforma democratizadora que establece un sistema electoral proporcional que es más representativo e incluyente, y que incluye una ley sobre cuotas de género, para promover la participación de las mujeres en los procesos electorales legislativos.   Sabemos muy bien -gracias a la evidencia internacional- que las cuotas en muchas partes han sido el único mecanismo probado que aumenta la participación femenina a nivel parlamentario. De hecho, los países que han implementado este mecanismo -en una de sus variantes, hay varios tipos de ellos- tienen un promedio de 24% de mujeres parlamentarias, mientras que los que no lo han hecho tienen un promedio inferior al 15%. En otros países, incluso incluyen algo que me gustaría tener en nuestro país y que es que pusieron un sistema de cebra, por lo que tienen un hombre y una mujer o una mujer y un hombre, ya que en algunos de estos lugares, esperaban completar el sistema y ponían a las mujeres en el final de la lista. Así que la gente votaba por el primero, para el segundo y nunca las consideraban. Siempre hemos estado buscando en los detalles, ya sabes, y no sé, pero en mi país, decimos "el diablo metió la cola", porque entonces ustedes pueden encontrar la manera de tropezarse con las cosas, ya sabes.   Bueno, en Chile, la ley de cuotas, como dije, nos permitirá asegurarnos de que al menos el 40% de los candidatos al Congreso son mujeres.   Para alcanzar ese objetivo, tenemos sanciones para todos quienes no lo respeten.    De esta manera, en la próxima elección que será en 2017, vamos a tener más candidatas y -yo espero también- más parlamentarias electas, quienes amplificarán la voz de las mujeres chilenas y contribuirán a la creación del Chile inclusivo, democrático y desarrollado al que todos aspiramos.   Queridas amigas:   Quiero concluir mis palabras –porque sé que tendremos un diálogo interactivo- haciendo hincapié en una de las ideas centrales que he tratado de transmitir hoy en día: en primer lugar, me gustaría decir que las mujeres pueden y podemos en todos los campos, desde lo  social, por supuesto, somos muchas mujeres y en el ámbito social, en el trabajo, por supuesto, las mujeres en el hogar, en el mundo académico y así sucesivamente. Pero también en la política, en Defensa, en muchas otras áreas. Pero también las mujeres pueden en el campo bancario, las mujeres pueden en el ámbito de la Justicia, en todas las áreas.   Pero me gustaría transmitir que la plena participación de las mujeres no sólo es crucial para la ampliación de los derechos, la reducción de las brechas y la autonomía de las propias mujeres, sino que también es fundamental para el fortalecimiento de nuestras instituciones políticas y el desarrollo integral, económico y humano de nuestro pueblo.   Tenemos que ser conscientes de que un sistema político que excluye, o que no incluye correctamente a una gran parte de la población -alrededor del 50% - no puede ser visto como democrático, y que se tendrán dificultades para tener la solidez y legitimidad que nuestros países necesitan desarrollar plenamente.   Una de las cosas que cada vez que se habla de cuota o aumento de la participación de las mujeres es que siempre en la discusión está que "bien, no necesitamos de cuotas, necesitamos gente buena ahí". Y siempre me pregunto a mí misma "pero siempre se trata de las personas, gente preparada, sean hombres o mujeres, ¿por qué esta discusión aparece cuando estamos hablando de las mujeres?" Quiero decir, que siempre es que tienen que estar todos los candidatos que sean buenas personas, éticamente buenas, preparadas para hacer lo que tienen que hacer. Así que esto es algo que apareció en esta discusión.   Porque estoy segura de que en todos los países -en muchos, muchos- muchas mujeres, que están bien preparadas, han tenido un costo, que ellas creen en altos principios y valores; y que quieren, a través de la política, poder desarrollar objetivos en sus vidas, pero necesitan un apoyo que no tienen. Una cuota. Muchas veces, en las sociedades - pero no en las Filipinas- pero en muchas sociedades, los partidos políticos no incluyen a las mujeres por lo general en las listas en las que ellas no pueden ser admitidas.   Pero yo siempre le pregunto a alguien, me refiero a que sé que el fútbol no es un deporte que en Filipinas sea el favorito de la mayoría, pero, tal vez, ¿el baloncesto, entonces? ¿Se imaginan un partido de baloncesto con la mitad de los jugadores? Es imposible. Es más de lo mismo que está sucediendo en nuestros países, por cierto. Si ustedes tiene la mitad del equipo, que no está participando plenamente, nunca serán capaces, no sólo de ganar el juego, sino de ganar lo que ustedes tienen por objetivos país, en términos de desarrollo sostenible, en términos de democracia, en términos de lucha contra la corrupción, en términos de una mayor transparencia, etcétera, etcétera.   Así que, en última instancia, si queremos que nuestra gente sea más próspera, nuestras sociedades más justas y nuestras democracias más sólidas y legítimas, tenemos que apostar por la inclusión, la equidad y la participación política de las mujeres.   Creo que es así de simple y claro.   Queridos amigos:   No hay duda de que hemos logrado avances sustanciales en materia de igualdad y empoderamiento de las mujeres durante estos 40 años desde la Primera Conferencia Mundial sobre la Mujer, pero todavía hay muchas barreras y prejuicios que derribar y un largo camino por recorrer.   Si queremos acelerar el ritmo y avanzar hacia la sociedad equitativa, pacífica y próspera a la que todos aspiramos, debemos redoblar nuestros esfuerzos hoy. Porque como la notable promotora de los derechos humanos, Eleanor Roosevelt, dijo: "Es hoy cuando tenemos que crear el mundo del futuro".   Confío en que este evento contribuirá a lograr estos objetivos.   Muchas gracias.