Versión original en inglés     Well, thanks so much, it’s lovely to be here with all of you.   Well, yes, as you mentioned, Latin America is a pretty peaceful region in the world and this is something that we’re very proud on, and on what we want to continue to be like that.   I think that part of this, I mean we had a lot of conflicts for many years, and, of course, there have been internal conflicts, civil wars and so on. But I think one of the issues that are very important is that the democracy has been a determinant factor on this peace process.   On the other hand, one country that has an issue for sometimes on 15 years is Colombia and I know that we all are very happy for what’s going there. We´re really respecting the process that President Santos is developing.   And Chile, along with other countries, are accompanied this process and we will be there to support of the efforts that Colombia are doing. And that it will mean in South America at least probably that would be last important conflict that will be ended.   But, we have learned some lessons because we believe that the majority of conflict, that have been a couple of conflicts between countries but many years ago, and we have been able to solve it through, you know, dialogue and pacific solutions, even though in some of those there have been some military actions and at the end, they were all in a peace way.   But we believe that we have learned some lessons because what we have had, many of us been, dictatorships in the past. So many of us understood that for us there’re some issues that are central, like democracy, the consolidation of democracy and that means good politics, fight of corruption and, of course, an increase of capacity of people.   On the other hand, we need the human rights; that it’s something essential that we need to respect it, so those are lessons that we’ve learnt. But on the other hand, we all understood that the economic growth is essential and the economic growth has to be in an essentially shared prosperity.   Because if you ask me if I see any possible conflict in the region, I don’t think any, I would say, traditional conflict, but I could see as a risk. It’s that because we don’t deal with inequalities that still are in Latin America. Latin America is the region of the world with the higher gaps and with more unequal region of the world. We’ve had gaps between once those had more and those once had less.   So, in order to have a real democracy, you need social cohesion, so you need to tackle inequalities, you need to improve people’s conditions, so even on fields that the nations are taking care of them, incentivizing them and give them the opportunities.   So I think that that’s the region for the most of government are going, in terms of continue modernizing our societies, ensuring the economy to continue active and dinamizated.   I think one of the other factors that have been very important in terms of lacks of conflicts is the integration causes. We have been developing a lot of integration processes, and firstly, at a regional level, and then as UNASUR in South America; and then CELAC, now we’re Caribbean and all the Central America and South America countries together. Of course that we’re in the OAS too, but I mean we have so different kind of packs, political packs but also we have economic packs and we’re working on that.   And one of the news is the Pacific Alliance where Chile, with Colombia, Mexico and Peru, are working on this alliance that has been very pragmatic, if I may say, but also very successful. We’ve all defined a lot of specific targets and we’re meeting them, so we’re very happy about it.   And we’re very happy that in the context of AP meeting that we had, we will have a meeting with APEC and Pacific Alliance, and I think it’s something very important even though three all the countries we’re already member of the APEC, but, of course, AP wants to know much more in these experiences.   So I think there’s a lot of factors and we’ll continue working on all the areas that it will ensure that Latin America has peaceful region.   You asked me about what are the kind of reforms or which is the agenda in my government.   Even though Chile has been doing pretty well and the economy has been for many years still growing, of course, you know that we’re the first partner trade; trade partner is China, and slowdown in China and the cooper prices that have come down, has impacted us. So, economy has been slowdown. But it have been said that we also understand that we’re not in a recession, we’re still growing, so we can do much more for people who still there, behind our people.   So that’s why we said, by one hand, because it is ethical reason, because there’re more reasons. But it also because of an economical reason, we need to improve the opportunities of the people. So one of the best things we thought is we need to ensure quality education for all.     We have a good coverage in education. Chile is a country with more, with 98 per cent of children. Girls and boys go to primary school, and more than 92 per cent go to secondary school. And then we have also important participation in tertiary education, 7 out of 10, boys and girls in tertiary education are the first in their families. So we have social ability too.   The thing is that we have to ensure the quality education because it’s not the same quality for everyone. So, that’s why we’re going in an educational reform. We’ll attempt firstly to ensure quality in education from the lowest level, I mean, from the nursery and kindergarten to the tertiary education, all over the country. That’s a challenge: Chile is pretty long, so sometimes we have universities everywhere but sometimes it’s not easy to get, you know, all the specialists, all the experts in the stream of the country. So we’re doing that.   In order to able to do that, last year we approved a fiscal reform, that was transversally accepted by all the political parties, in our Congress, and that will give us an increase a 3 per cent of the GDP that will permit us to really ensure quality education and others social programs.   We’re also supporting on Health, so we can improve health conditions. We need to improve the quality. That’s, we have services everywhere but we need to improve quality and opportunities.   The other thing we need to work on, and we’re working on, is a labor agenda. We believe that labor relationships with the employers and employees have to be modern, have to a good relationship, so that’s, a good real relation. So we’re working on that too.   And finally, talking about the challenges, we have had challenges on politics, and challenges on the Agenda of Transparency, Probity and Anticorruption, we are not a corrupted country, but we’ve had some signs that we said “OK, stop, we have to stop this”. So we have a very strong agenda in terms of anticorruption, transparency.   We’ve had a lot of bills in terms of improving the quality of politics, separating –and I know that this is something that it can be controversial, but for us it’s essential- no money and business in politics. If there’s somebody want to give money as a person, it will be fine, but not with business.   And the parliamentarians who will not put to those to the law, they will lose their seat in Congress. So, we have a lot, and also we’re working on something will permit owns in business to be more transparent.   Question: President, how important is TPP for you? You have an agreement so everybody has mentioned it’s all ready, is this making any real difference for Chile and can tell me specifically about where it would be the case.   President Bachelet: All you know that was something that we aspired ourselves sometimes when negotiation were a little of not going as well as we would like to. The words of some people pushing and said “OK, guys, you really have, but all these people do really need the TPP”   But you know we would convince that it’s very important to be a part of TPP, for many reasons. Firstly because it is a sort of, If I may say, an alliance and trade agreement that going in correct direction. Secondly, because it will permit us to all put at higher standards that we can be part of it, and we can be part of the countries that they can ensure a high standard and give you more opportunities. And, thirdly, because it will permit us to improve our free trade agreements that we already have with other countries. So we’re very happy to be part of it.   I have to say that it was 5 years of negotiation, not always very easy, sometimes very tough, but in the end I think we got a TPP where Chile will have benefit forms. We will not, I mean, then we have to go it to Congress and perhaps some discussions will be there. But I think that we have very good arguments to explain to people why the TPP is great thing for us.   I will be defending else everywhere too, from political point of view because as you already mentioned, you can see it also in Latin America, we have seen in the Middle East some years ago. I think the world has changed, people have changed, it’s time to technology, it’s time to the media that all of you can see in your bedroom, the world is going on somewhere, it’s because people have more information in different ways, it’s because they’re better educated and so on. So that’s very challenging, it’s a challenge for governments, a challenge for the business, because when we have understood it that the world is changing, and we cannot try to move backwards the world as we did before, we’ll need to adapt and find the solutions, the answers to carrying to people.   I think it is good news; it’s good news when people are protesting and get things that “I am not right”. I think it is good news because before people maybe were very passive and I am not talking about specific countries because every country has done their own the situations. But I think it’s a good thing that people more warned and in some sense there’s more other is more transparency and they would want more transparency. I think that is good thing for the world. But the nexus have to be doing much better, government and business too.   Question: President, changes in education would provide, dealing with your own young people, and those efforts, is that recognition?   President Bachelet: Well, I don’t know, I mean I think the priorities are also probably what is important that we have found out is that for so many years because we had a dictatorship and we had a lack of rights. Probably we worked too much on rights and not much on our responsibilities and duties. So now we’re working a lot on not only ensuring education level, higher quality education levels, but also try to form citizens, with –you know- not only a clear conscious of the rights, but also a conscious of the responsibilities. Not only as a part of the problem, but also be a part of the solution.   So I think in that sense, education is not only encouraged, it’s on quality, but also it’s on developing citizens that our responsibility for what’s going.   And I just wanna to mention about education that was; do you need to change. Now everything is about collaboration and co-work, and the same happens on kind of all, in terms of I think we need to learn in uncertainty, that’s how the world is right now. And I want to propel that, and the only way is to do it in a collaborative way and do it together.   Question: Thank you very much and thank to all of you.    Traducción   Bueno, muchas gracias, es maravilloso estar aquí con todos ustedes.   Bueno, sí, como usted ha mencionado, América Latina es una región muy tranquila en el mundo y esto es algo de lo que estamos muy orgullosos, y en lo que queremos que siga siendo así.   Creo que parte de esto, quiero decir que hemos tenido una gran cantidad de conflictos por muchos años, y, por supuesto, ha habido conflictos internos, guerras civiles y así sucesivamente. Pero creo que una de las cuestiones que es muy importante es que la democracia ha sido un factor determinante en este proceso de paz.   Por otro lado, un país que tiene problemas, algunas veces, por 15 años ya es Colombia y sé que estamos todos muy contentos por lo que está pasando ahí. Nosotros respetamos el proceso que el Presidente Santos está desarrollando.   Y Chile, junto con otros países, está acompañando este proceso y vamos a estar ahí para apoyar los esfuerzos que Colombia esté haciendo. Y eso significará que en América del Sur, por lo menos y probablemente, termine el último conflicto importante.   Pero, hemos aprendido algunas lecciones porque creemos que la mayoría de los conflictos, que han sido un par de conflictos entre países, fueron hace muchos años, y hemos sido capaces de resolverlos a través de -usted sabe- soluciones pacíficas y de diálogo, a pesar de que en algunos ha habido algunas acciones militares y al final, todos terminaron en paz.  Pero creemos que hemos aprendido algunas lecciones porque lo que hemos tenido, muchos de nosotros, han sido dictaduras en el pasado. Así que muchos entendemos que para nosotros hay algunas cuestiones que son fundamentales, como la democracia, la consolidación de la democracia y eso significa buenas políticas, la lucha contra la corrupción y, por supuesto, un aumento de la capacidad de las personas.   Por otro lado, tenemos los derechos humanos; que es algo esencial que tenemos que respetar, por lo que aquellas son las lecciones que hemos aprendido.   Pero, por otro lado, todos entendimos que el crecimiento económico es esencial y el crecimiento económico tiene que ser esencialmente una prosperidad compartida.   Porque si usted me pregunta si veo cualquier posible conflicto en la región, no creo que haya ningún -yo diría- conflicto tradicional, pero puede haber riesgos. Y es debido a que no nos ocupamos de las desigualdades que aún se encuentran en América Latina. América Latina es la región del mundo con las más altas brechas y la región más desigual del mundo. Hemos tenido brechas entre los que una vez tenían más y los que una vez tenían menos.   Así, con el fin de tener una democracia real, usted necesita de cohesión social, de manera que usted necesita hacer frente a las desigualdades. Es necesario mejorar las condiciones de las personas, incluso en las áreas en que las naciones están preocupadas, que las incentiven y les den las oportunidades.   Así que creo que ésa es la región a la que en su mayoría los gobiernos están yendo, en términos de continuar la modernización de nuestras sociedades, lo que garantiza que la economía siga activa y dinamizada.   Creo que uno de los otros factores que han sido muy importantes en términos de carencias de los conflictos es la integración. Hemos estado desarrollando una gran cantidad de procesos de integración; en primer lugar, a nivel regional, y luego como UNASUR en Sudamérica; y luego la CELAC, ahora estamos todos los países de América Central y América del Sur y el Caribe juntos. Por supuesto que estamos en la OEA también, pero me refiero a que tenemos diferentes tipos de paquetes, los paquetes de políticas, pero también tenemos paquetes económicos y estamos trabajando en eso.   Y una de las nuevas es la Alianza del Pacífico, donde Chile, con Colombia, México y Perú, están trabajando en esta alianza que ha sido muy pragmática, si se me permite decirlo, pero también de gran éxito. Todos hemos definido un conjunto de objetivos específicos y los hemos reunido, así que estamos muy contentos.   Y estamos muy contentos de que en el contexto de la reunión AP que teníamos, vamos a tener una reunión con la APEC y la Alianza del Pacífico, y creo que es algo muy importante a pesar de que tres de los países ya somos miembros de la APEC, pero, por supuesto, AP quiere conocer mucho más en estas experiencias.   Así que creo que hay un conjunto de factores y vamos a seguir trabajando en todas las áreas que asegurarán que América Latina tenga una región pacífica.   Usted me preguntó acerca de lo que son el tipo de reformas o cuál es el programa en mi Gobierno.   A pesar de que Chile lo ha estado haciendo bastante bien y la economía ha estado durante muchos años creciendo, por supuesto, usted sabe que somos el primer socio comercial; nuestro primer socio comercial es China, y la desaceleración en China y los precios del cobre que han bajado, nos han impactado. Así, la economía ha estado en desaceleración. Pero han dicho que también entendemos que no estamos en una recesión, todavía estamos creciendo, por lo que podemos hacer mucho más para que la gente siga creciendo; estamos apoyando a nuestra gente.   Así que por eso hemos dicho, por un lado, porque es la razón ética, ya que hay más razones. Pero también por una razón económica, tenemos que mejorar las oportunidades de las personas. Así que una de las mejores cosas que pensamos es que necesitamos garantizar una educación de calidad para todos.   Tenemos una buena cobertura en la educación, Chile es un país con el 98% de los niños en ella. Las niñas y los niños van a la escuela primaria, y más del 92% va a la escuela secundaria. Y luego tenemos que la participación también es importante en la educación terciaria; 7 de cada diez; los jóvenes en la educación terciaria son los primeros en sus familias. Así que tenemos la capacidad social, también.   Lo que pasa es que tenemos que garantizar la educación de calidad, porque no es la misma calidad para todos. Así, es por eso es que estamos en una reforma educativa. Intentaremos en primer lugar, garantizar la calidad en la educación desde el nivel más bajo, es decir, desde la sala cuna y el jardín infantil hasta la educación terciaria, en todo el país. Eso es un reto: Chile es bastante largo, así que a veces tenemos universidades en todas partes, pero a veces no es fácil de conseguir, ya sabe, todos los especialistas, todos los expertos a través del país. Así que estamos haciendo eso.   Para poder hacer eso, el año pasado aprobamos una reforma fiscal, que fue transversalmente aceptada por todos los partidos políticos, en nuestro Congreso, y que nos dará un aumento de un 3% del PIB, que nos permitirá realmente garantizar una educación de calidad y otros programas sociales.   También estamos apoyando en Salud, para que podamos mejorar las condiciones de salud. Tenemos que mejorar la calidad. Es decir, tenemos servicios en todas partes, pero tenemos que mejorar la calidad y las oportunidades.   La otra cosa que tenemos que trabajar, y nosotros estamos trabajando en ello, es una Agenda Laboral. Creemos que las relaciones laborales con los empleadores y los empleados tienen que ser modernas, que una buena relación, por lo que es, sea una buena relación real. Así que estamos trabajando en eso también.   Hemos tenido un conjunto de proyectos de ley en términos de mejorar la calidad de la política, que separa -y sé que esto es algo que puede ser controvertido, pero para nosotros es esencial- el dinero y los negocios en la política. Si hay alguien que quiera dar dinero como persona, que va a estar bien, pero no con los negocios de por medio.   Y, por último, hablando de retos, hemos tenido desafíos en la política, y los retos de la Agenda de Transparencia, Probidad y Lucha contra la Corrupción. No somos un país corrupto, pero hemos tenido algunos signos y dijimos "OK, detengámonos, tenemos que parar esto". Así que tenemos una agenda muy fuerte en términos de lucha contra la corrupción, la transparencia.   Y los parlamentarios que no se ajusten a la ley, van a perder su escaño en el Congreso. Por lo tanto, tenemos una gran cantidad de cosas, y también estamos trabajando en algo que permitirá que poseer negocios sea más transparente.   Pregunta: Presidenta, ¿qué tan importante es TPP para usted? Usted tiene un acuerdo que todos han mencionado que está listo, ¿está haciendo esto una diferencia real para Chile, y me puede decir específicamente acerca de dónde estaría sería el caso?   Presidenta Bachelet: Todos ustedes saben eso era algo a lo que nosotros mismos aspirábamos, a veces, cuando la negociación no iba un poco hacia lo que nos hubiese gustado. Algunas personas insistiendo y diciendo: "Bueno, chicos, que realmente lo han hecho bien, pero toda esta gente realmente necesita el TPP".   Pero usted ya sabe, nos  convenceríamos de que es muy importante ser parte del TPP, por muchas razones. En primer lugar, porque es una especie de -si se me permite decirlo- una alianza y un acuerdo comercial que va en la dirección correcta. En segundo lugar, porque nos permitirá poner todo en los estándares más altos de los que podamos ser parte, y podemos ser parte de los países que pueden garantizar un alto nivel y dar más oportunidades. Y, en tercer lugar, porque va a permitirnos mejorar nuestros acuerdos de libre comercio que ya tenemos con otros países. Así que estamos muy felices de ser parte de él.   Tengo que decir que fueron 5 años de negociación, no siempre muy fáciles, a veces muy difícil, pero al final creo que tenemos un TPP donde Chile tendrá formas de beneficios. Nosotros, quiero decir, entonces tenemos que llevarlo al Congreso y quizás se generen algunas discusiones ahí. Pero creo que tenemos muy buenos argumentos para explicar a la gente por qué el TPP es algo muy importante para nosotros.   Voy a estar defendiendo además en todas partes, desde el punto de vista político, porque como ya se ha mencionado, se puede ver también en América Latina, lo hemos visto en el Oriente Medio hace unos años. Creo que el mundo ha cambiado, la gente ha cambiado, es el momento de la tecnología, es el momento de los medios de comunicación que todos ustedes pueden ver en su dormitorio. El mundo se está dando en cualquier parte, y eso es porque la gente tiene más información de diferentes maneras, porque están mejor educados y etc. Así que eso es un desafío, es un reto para los gobiernos, un desafío para los negocios, porque cuando hayamos comprendido que el mundo está cambiando y no podamos tratar de regresar el mundo de antes, tendremos que adaptarnos y encontrar las soluciones, las respuestas que nos lleven a las personas.   Creo que es una buena noticia; es una buena noticia cuando la gente está protestando y logra cosas, y dice "no estoy bien". Creo que es una buena noticia porque antes la gente tal vez era muy pasiva y yo no estoy hablando de países específicos, porque cada país se ha hecho cargo de sus propias situaciones. Pero creo que es bueno que la gente demande y, en cierto sentido, haya en el otro más transparencia y que deseen mayor transparencia. Creo que eso es algo bueno para el mundo. Pero el nexo para hacerlo tiene que ser mucho mejor, gobiernos y empresarios también.   Pregunta: Presidenta, ¿los cambios en la educación tendrían que ver los jóvenes de su país, esos esfuerzos, es eso un reconocimiento?   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, no sé, quiero decir que creo que las prioridades están también; probablemente es importante que hayamos descubierto que durante tantos años, porque teníamos una dictadura, tuvimos carencia de derechos. Probablemente hemos trabajado mucho por los derechos y no mucho en nuestras responsabilidades y deberes. Así que ahora estamos trabajando mucho en no sólo garantizar el nivel de educación, niveles de educación de mayor calidad, sino también en tratar de formar ciudadanos, con –usted ya sabe- con una no clara conciencia de derechos, pero también una conciencia de las responsabilidades. Ser no sólo una parte del problema, sino también ser parte de la solución.   Así que creo que en ese sentido, no sólo fomentamos la educación, es sobre la calidad, pero también está en formar ciudadanos nuestra responsabilidad de lo que está pasando.   Sólo quiero mencionar acerca de la educación, que tenemos que cambiar. Ahora todo tiene que ver con la colaboración y el trabajo conjunto, y lo mismo sucede en todo, en términos de que creo que tenemos que aprender de la incertidumbre, así es como el mundo está ahora. Y es lo que quiero impulsar, y la única manera es hacerlo de forma colaborativa y hacerlo juntos.   Pregunta: Muchas gracias, y gracias a todos.