Versión original en inglés    First, I would like to thank you for the warm welcome you have given us in the Palace of Malacañang. This visit is of great importance for both our countries, since next year we will celebrate the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Chile and The Philippines.   Our diplomatic ties with the Philippines are the oldest Chile has with a country in South East Asia.   Even though in 1946 the world had not yet recovered from the enormous impact of World War II, especially from the deep effects it had in so many Asian Countries, our countries had the vision to explore the opposing rims of the Pacific and work together in a spirit of cooperation. Seventy years later, the Pacific Rim has established itself as the most important area for trade and economic growth.   As you said so correctly, Mr. President, Chile and The Philippines, The Philippines and Chile share common values and principles: we believe in democracy and human rights, in shared prosperity. And of course that’s why that we are so happy to be here to look at our common history has been also about common challenges and how we can work together in these new challenges that we need to confront.   Chile aims at being considered today as a Bridge Country, one that builds a consistently better relation between Latin America and Asia. Our active participation in APEC, being one of the founders of FEALAC, and our intention of having a more intense interaction with ASEAN, are the result of the process that Chile has carried out in terms of its connection with Asia in general, and with the Philippines in particular.   At the same time, we have witnessed the continuous growth of our countries’ economic relation as well as the arrival of Filipino investment to our country. This is why we see with great enthusiasm the progress of the studies to establish a Free Trade Agreement between Chile and the Philippines.   But the process is complemented by a greater cultural closeness and of the growing number of Filipino citizens who have chosen Chile as a place to live and develop. We can already recognize their kind faces and their wonderful cuisine. Rest assured, dear Filipino friends, that Chile, as is its tradition and its calling, will always be a welcoming country.   This visit and our participation in the APEC Summit afterwards, will allow us to explore not only the possibilities of a closer and more fruitful economic relation, but also common approaches to public policy. Both Chile and The Philippines have aimed at more inclusive economic development, and this presents the possibility of enriching our bilateral relation through the exchange of better practices, of cooperation and, political dialogue in this area.   We also have experiences to share that come from situations that unite us, such as belonging to the Ring of Fire of the Pacific. This is why cooperation in disaster prevention, management and risk reduction is a very important and central part of this visit.   Dear Presidente Aquino,   Our great Poet and Nobel Prize, Pablo Neruda, wrote once about the ocean that turns us into brothers at a distance. I will say the English first and then I’m gonna paraphrasing, first in Spanish and then paraphrasing in English because translating a poet isn’t easy, you know.   “El océano pacífico se salía del mapa. No había dónde ponerlo. Era tan grande desordenado y azul que no cabía en ninguna parte. Por eso lo dejaron frente a mi ventana” Paraphrasing: “The Pacific Ocean came out of the map.  There was no place to put it.  It was so big, wild and blue that it couldn´t be contained in any place. That´s why they left it in front of my window”. I hope that this window that looks out to our common Ocean is also the window through which we see the future.   I would like to thank you again for your kindness, courtesy and the very warm reception you have given me and my delegation.   I also thank you for your invitation and I hope that we could have you in Chile as soon as possible. And I want to make a close friendship between Chile and The Philippines.   ¡Viva Chile, Viva Las Filipinas!   Traducción    En primer lugar, me gustaría darle las gracias por la cálida bienvenida que nos han dado en el Palacio de Malacañang. Esta visita es de gran importancia para nuestros dos países, ya que el próximo año vamos a celebrar el 70 aniversario del establecimiento de relaciones diplomáticas entre Chile y Filipinas.   Nuestros lazos diplomáticos con las Filipinas son los más antiguos que Chile tiene con un país del Sudeste Asiático.   A pesar de que en 1946 el mundo aún no se había recuperado del enorme impacto de la Segunda Guerra Mundial, sobre todo de los profundos efectos que tenía en tantos países de Asia, nuestros países tuvieron la visión de explorar la cuenca opuesta del Pacífico y trabajar juntos en un espíritu de cooperación. Setenta años más tarde, la Cuenca del Pacífico se ha consolidado como el área más importante para el comercio y el crecimiento económico.   Como usted ha dicho tan bien, señor Presidente, Chile y Filipinas, Filipinas y Chile comparten valores y principios comunes: creemos en la democracia y los derechos humanos, en la prosperidad compartida. Y por supuesto que es por eso que estamos tan felices de estar aquí para mirar nuestra historia en común, que ha sido también sobre los desafíos comunes y cómo podemos trabajar juntos en estos nuevos retos que tenemos que afrontar.   Chile aspira a ser considerado hoy como un País Puente, que construye una relación consistentemente mejor entre América Latina y Asia. Nuestra activa participación en APEC, siendo uno de los fundadores del FEALAC, y nuestra intención de tener una interacción más intensa con la ASEAN, son el resultado del proceso que Chile ha llevado a cabo en términos de su relación con Asia en general, y con las Filipinas, en particular.   Al mismo tiempo, hemos sido testigos del crecimiento continuo de la relación económica de nuestros países, así como la llegada de la inversión filipina a nuestro país. Es por eso que vemos con gran entusiasmo el progreso de los estudios para establecer un Tratado de Libre Comercio entre Chile y Filipinas.   Pero el proceso se complementa con una mayor cercanía cultural y el creciente número de ciudadanos filipinos que han elegido a Chile como un lugar para vivir y desarrollarse. Ya podemos reconocer sus caras amables y su maravillosa cocina. Tengan la seguridad, queridos amigos filipinos, que Chile, como es su tradición y su vocación, siempre será un país acogedor.   Esta visita y nuestra participación en la Cumbre de APEC después, nos permitirá explorar no sólo las posibilidades de una relación económica más estrecha y fructífera, sino también enfoques comunes para las políticas públicas. Tanto Chile como Filipinas se han propuesto un desarrollo económico más inclusivo, y esto presenta la posibilidad de enriquecer nuestra relación bilateral mediante el intercambio de mejores prácticas, la cooperación y el diálogo político, en este ámbito.   También tenemos experiencias para compartir que vienen de situaciones que nos unen, como pertenecer al Cinturón de Fuego del Pacífico. Ésta es la razón por la que la cooperación en la prevención de desastres, la gestión y la reducción del riesgo es una parte muy importante y central de esta visita.   Estimado Presidente Aquino:   Nuestro gran poeta y Premio Nobel, Pablo Neruda, escribió una vez sobre el océano que nos convierte en hermanos a distancia. Voy a decirlo en inglés primero y luego lo voy a parafrasear -primero en español y luego parafrasearlo en inglés- porque la traducción de un poeta no es fácil, ustedes ya saben.   “El océano pacífico se salía del mapa. No había dónde ponerlo. Era tan grande desordenado y azul que no cabía en ninguna parte. Por eso lo dejaron frente a mi ventana” Paraphrasing: “The Pacific Ocean came out of the map.  There was no place to put it.  It was so big, wild and blue that it couldn´t be contained in any place. That´s why they left it in front of my window”. Espero que esta ventana que da a nuestro océano común sea también la ventana a través de la cual veamos el futuro.   Me gustaría darle las gracias de nuevo por su amabilidad, la cortesía y la recepción muy cálida que nos ha dado a mí y a mi delegación.   También le doy las gracias por su invitación y espero poder tenerlo en Chile tan pronto como sea posible. Y quiero que tengamos una estrecha amistad entre Chile y Filipinas.   ¡Viva Chile, Viva Las Filipinas!