SPEECH BY H.E. MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, PRESIDENT OF CHILE, FOR HER MASTER CLASS AT KU LEUVEN “EQUALITY AND SOCIAL COHESION FOR DEMOCRACY”  Leuven, June 10th 2015   Friends:   It is an honor to be here with you, in one of the oldest educational institutions in the world (almost 600 years) and the largest and most important in Belgium. The distinction that you have bestowed upon me –this Doctorate Honoris Causa- fills me with pride and joy and creates a deep tie between us.   I know very well that this university, whose rich history is inseparable from that of Europe it has always been, both for its privileged geographic location, as well as its recognized academic quality, a distinguished place for meeting and analysis, research and generation of ideas.  Great thinkers, including some of the most prominent humanists and renaissances have walked through these halls and this land –Flanders. I think of Erasmus of Rotterdam, Thomas More and Juan Luis Vives, whose monumental works expressed their interest in people, in the political and social order, in education and human institutions and their connection to the divine.  Vives, one of the most renowned of all Spanish thinkers, had a particular concern for equality and dignity of human beings, which he expressed even when referring to the situation of the indigenous peoples of America. His ideas anticipated an certainly influenced the greater defender of indigenous people, the dominical friar Bartolomé de las Casas, and certainly, many others.   This line of thought is present in all those who work for equality and justice in social relations. Obviously, today’s world is different, and the relationships of power and domination that existed then –in the colonial era- no longer exist, thankfully. But, especially in Latin America, injustice and inequality prevail, and a small elite still concentrates power and enjoys a level of well-being, that could and should be shares by all.    The task we have set for ourselves in Chile aims precisely at responding to this ageless problem, to reconstruct the ties that bind us, rebalance relations and reach broad agreements that allow us to build a better society.   European countries after World War II did something similar. A new spirit of solidarity and cooperation emerged from the war’s desolation, enabling the construction of a public support network, the European Social model, and more equitable and prosperous societies.   Europe indeed has changed since 1945, but still the model is in question. This is proof that societies undergo constant transformations, and that it is necessary to adapt policies, institutions and organizations to the historical contexts and realities of each country. And many of those adjustments are a result of the reflection and research carried out in universities such as this one.    In fact, I think that one of the fundamental tasks of universities, particularly those engaged in social sciences, consists of studying reality, detecting anomalies and tensions, and proposing solutions, such, for example as we see today in Chile, policy and institutional reforms.   That is a fundamental task of Academia, and of social scientists, but it is not the only one. It is also to imagine a better world, to think and discuss what should be the great ideals and dreams which give meaning to social and political activities.   So I think that the space in which we find ourselves right now is the perfect place to talk about the type of society and democracy that we desire, for Chile, Latin American and Europe, and what can we do to build it.   Today, I would like to share what we are doing in Chile to advance towards that ideal that lights and shows the way; that which Thomas More called Utopia.   I want to start by clarifying my own wish, which I believe it is shared with many fellow countrymen and countrywomen: For me (and I understand that everyone has own view), that society must be at the same time, prosperous and just. And these characteristics are mutually reinforcing.   Society must set the foundations –objective and subjective one- that promote well-being for all, and the achievement of individual and collective projects, guided by the values of cooperation and solidarity.   It must be a society that guarantees rights and opportunities, but also duties and compensation ensuring that everyone can take advantage of the opportunities created and that no one is left behind.   It must be a democratic and inclusive society, in which differences are valued and conflicts are resolved through dialogue and participation.  And to make all this possible, so that we can actually make progress towards that ideal society, a significant degree of equality and social cohesion must be achieved.    As the political scientist and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr stated “something of balance (…) is the basis of any justice achieved in human relations”.  Because where there are inequalities, or imbalances, a few can impose their will, their world view, and their interests on the many, who, in turn, are unable to satisfy their needs and realize their dreams. And, as a result, there is no justice.   Without a minimum of equality –and the promise that it will improve- it will be difficult that all commit themselves to working with enthusiasm on a common project. And that is not only a problem for the public and the “national community” in the abstract, but also for each individual, each family and for economic and human development in the medium and long term.   Without an equitable and universal access to public goods and services of quality, the logic of the market will prevail – as it already does. Competition will be the only way to relate to each other, “every man for himself” will be the motto, and there will be no cohesion, no possible cooperation nor solidarity. All of this threatens the stability and the development of a solid modern democracy. And undermines the foundations of the social pact, which is to achieve the greatest possible welfare for all.   Because, as Tomas More said, in a very different context to the current one, but which doesn’t seems so distant- “every man knows that he must worry about himself, although State is flourishing, he would die hunger. So, that he sees the necessity of not preferring on all concerns to the public.”   In a scenario like that –not far from what we see in Latin American- where the “common good” is perceived by many as alien and where little value is given to the Public –largely because it does not give satisfactory answers to everyday problems- it is difficult to ask men and women to work in pursuit of shared objectives. And without that effort by all, it is difficult to move forward and arrive at the desired destination.      That’s why I put the focus on equality and cohesion when I think of the future of our people, and why in my country we are carrying out reforms aimed at reducing inequalities and social segregation.   Now, if what we want is to generate real change we must start with a correct diagnosis. How far are we in Latin America from that cherished society? The reforms are urgent or can we wait for a “more favorable” moment, as demanded by some, independent of what is the context?   We know that there are still significant pockets of poverty in the region.  We know that the gaps between rich and poor have deepened, and that ours is the most unequal region in the world.   We know that many are excluded, and have no access to basic services and opportunities for progress. This mainly affects the children and young people of the continent, women, our indigenous people, afro-descendants and those living in rural areas.    And we know that our societies are not very cohesive, which can be explained by the unequal access to services and opportunities, by an increasing individualism and the resulting difficulty in articulating collective projects in which everyone feels that they have a role.   Let me give you some examples:  Despite the important reduction of poverty experienced by the region in recent decades, 165 million people remain poor. This is 3 out of 10 people, and 69 million live in extreme poverty.   And there is a fact, which is particularly troubling: high child poverty. ECLAC estimated that there are 70.5 million children and adolescents who live in poverty in the region. That is: 4 out of 10.   This is an urgent wake up call, because we must be aware that this reality, which foreshadows an unpromising future for these children, hangs a question mark over the future of Latin American.   On the other hand, with regard to economic inequality, we see that the bottom income quintile of households receive only 5.6% of total revenues, while the richest quintile is left with 46.7%.    Sadly this is a trend that is becoming more acute, and not just in our continent. Yesterday, at OECD, we were discussing that whole world inequality is bigger right now: the riches becomes richer and the poor becomes poorer. According to a recent study from OXFAM, 1% of the planet’s richest owns 48% of the wealth, and it is expected that this figure will reach 54% in 2019.   And if we look closely, it is even more dramatic: today, 80 of the world’s richest people possess the same portion of the cake than 3.6 billion of poor women and men. So, no one can say that this state of affairs is fair.   In terms of inequality of access to services, we can mention –for example- that 4 of every 10 families have no roof to live under, or live in poor quality housing. This percentage exceeds 70 per cent in countries such Nicaragua, Bolivia and Peru.  Meanwhile, 33 percent of the region’s rural population lacks basic sanitation services, and 36% does not have safe drinking water.   To revert these gaps and move towards, the construction of a just and developed society entails combating poverty and exclusion, creating conditions for equality, and opening spaces for diversity, which allow the gestation of a shared identity and a community of interests and values.    One tends to think –and in Latin American this idea is prevalent- that these conditions of equality and inclusion can only be generated if a country is rich, when the total amount of wealth is large enough, which can be distributed among all.   However, international experience –and I think the history of Europe is clear in this regard – shows us that this is not true.   Some time ago, a Norwegian minister told me something that very few remember when they talk about the road to success of developed countries, particularly the Nordic ones, which are the ones with the highest standards of living and better rate of equality and human development.    He told me “it is not true that Norway today is an inclusive country because it is wealthy. After the World War, we were very poor, and we decided that we should have an inclusive strategy, which included men and women, girls and boys, and thanks to that we are rich, and not the other way around”.   This example show us that when we speak of equality, inclusion and cohesion we are not referring only to an ethical principles on which we can legitimately disagree, we are also referring to a strategic imperative. We speak of essential factors for the development to achieve that shares prosperity that the World Bank talks about, as well as political stability and social peace.   Today, we have empirical evidence –endorsed even by economists of the IMF- which shows that the social fragmentation and income inequality hinders economic achievements.   We must also bear in mind that inequality, the exclusion of large segments of the population and social fragmentation create discomfort and can, if we do not act decisively and timely, weaken the legitimacy of our political and economic systems.   The same can occur if rising expectations of substantive change and progress that we see in much of contemporary societies –including the European- are frustrated. This was evident –in the Chilean case- with the recently published “Report on Human Development in Chile”, prepared by the United Nations Development Program.   All this shows that we are still far from the society that we crave, and shows us that the time for action; the “enabling environment” is now.   This is why in Chile we are building consensus and putting great energy on the generation of equality of rights and opportunities, and equity and inclusion in different fronts, such as taxation, education, labor, politics, childhood, women rights and youth and gender, among others.   We are making great efforts to close social gaps and prevent segments of the population from being left behind, by ending inequalities and integrating the excluded.   Our purpose –as I have said on other occasions- is two-fold. We want all citizens, independent of their social, political, cultural, sexual, geographical or ethnic condition, to develop their potential and have a good life. And, on the other hand, we also want each and every one of them to contribute to the common development of the country.    We seek, in short, to develop personal skills and collective strengths, and the various reforms we are implementing all point in that direction.   For example, we have carried out tax reform, the largest of its kind in the last 30 years, which sparked great discussions and disputes, but which finally received overwhelming support in our Congress.   It is a reform that will allow us to share the burden in a more equitable and fairer manner, so that those who have more, contribute more. And it ensures permanent financing for those transformations, especially in education and social protection, which we promised and which were supported by our citizens.   We are also carrying forward significant political reforms, essentially those that will lead to a more democratic system. This includes one that’s a historic milestone: a few weeks ago, we replaced the binominal electoral system, inherited from the dictatorship and designed to undermine the power of the vote and generate a permanent tie between the two main political forces in the legislature.   The new system, which is proportional, will allow us to have a more representative, inclusive and legitimate democracy in the eyes of the citizens, in which each vote is worth what it truly deserves, where there is more competition and better territorial equity in the representation criteria.   Along with this, we have moved towards gender equality with a quota system, which established that, from now on, at least 40% of the nominations must be female.   But we must recognize while there are excluded citizens or all those that can’t participate in politics in equal terms, this ideal will not become reality.   While women, who constitute more than 50% of the population in my country, remain underrepresented in Congress and the Executive, the words of Serafina Davalos, a Paraguayan lawyer, at the First International Feminine Congress of 1910, will continue to ring true: “The democratic character of the State is pure “myth”, because “democracy”, which means sine qua non equality, freedom…. cannot admit privileges of birth, being born male or female”.   For this reason, and because we are confident that women’s contributions are fundamental to economic and social progress, my Government has given priority to the work for gender equality.   As soon as I assumed the Presidency, in March of last year, I sent a bill to Congress, creating the Ministry of Women and Gender Equality, in order to strengthen the institutional framework and promote and guarantee the rights of all my countrywomen. This law has been already enacted, and the Ministry has begun its process of installation.   We have also promoted other policies aimed at safeguarding such basic principles, as the right to life, liberty and security. But there’re still gaps for possibility to have equal jobs, equal payments; because in my first government, I did sent a law, but then they told me it was against the Constitution to put something like that. So that’s why, that’s one of the many reasons because we need a new Constitution in Chile. Do not permit any constitution to restrict your rights and opportunities of men and women in our country.   Talking about right to life, in a good life, for example, to protect victims of violence, which in Chile causes around 40 femicides per year, we are doubling the number of safe houses for women and children when they are threatened by violence. And we will increase by 25% the number of centers that deliver support and timely assistance to women who need it. Of course, these measures will be of little use if we do not promote the independence and autonomy of women, at the same time. That is what we are doing; ensuring that they are part of the workforce, with vocational training and skills, especially focused on the poorest women, thus, we reduce their vulnerability to violence and abuse and, at the same time, promote their personal growth and the productive development of Chile.   But if we talk about policies that promote equality, the most important of them is currently focused on education.   This is particularly relevant topic –and so we understood it very early on, because it is in this area that the hopes of the younger generations and their families are placed, and therein resides the future of the nation, its ability to progress, to have cohesion and democratization.   The Argentinian politician Amancio Alcorta said that education, in particular public education, “has an objective an a result to awaken dormant energies and restore to men and people the fullness of the strength.” And he added that while ignorance condemned to live under perpetual tutelage, education prepares for all emancipation.  Thus, we say by through the educational system we can deliver the essential tools for the full development of each individual, prepare children and young people for life in society and strengthen the foundations of democracy.   Thus, schools must be a space for learning, integration, understanding differences, promoting civic equality and for contact with the democratic experience. In other words, a republican space per excellence.   Unfortunately, in Chile, -and Latin America in general- this ideal is far from a reality. Although in recent decades, we have experienced significantly in coverage and access to education, we have a serious deficit in quality, especially in the poorest sectors. Worse still: we have a highly segregated system that not only is not conductive to integration but also reproduces and widens social inequalities.   In my country, we have a mixed school system, made up of private paid schools, schools that are private but receive grants from the State, and public schools managed by local government (municipalities)   Many of these schools –in general, private ones- charge incorporation fees, very high monthly payments and select students. Others –many which receive public funds- require also an additional payment by families. Thus, we have created a highly segregated system, in which the rich study with the rich and the poor study with the poor.   This means that for too many years in Chile has underwritten private profit with public funds. But above all, it means that we have perpetuated unequal capacities and opportunities, as well as created divisive social networks and world views.   This has deeply damaged the social fabric, has contribute to widening gaps and, in consequence, prevented Chileans from sharing a common vision of the country, to recognize each other in a context braider than their own, in diversity and build channels of cooperation.   In short, it does not contribute to the construction of an inclusive and democratic country that we seek.   In addition, this segregation –according to money, according to academic standards- eliminates the positive effect that better performing children have on those less advantaged, compromising the quality of the system as a whole.   It is proven fact that the learning of the most vulnerable children improves when they share a classroom with others of higher cultural capital. Likewise, the more advantaged are deprived of a more diverse environment, which would enrich their understanding of the world. This effect –called the peer effect- disappears in highly segregated schools such as our, creating less favorable conditions for the development of all.   These are just some of the shortcomings of our educational system that we are already correcting. A few days ago, we enacted the “Law of Inclusion”, which ends with the practice that families must pay a part of the monthly payment in private schools that receive public funds. In addition, it eliminates the selection process and profits in all primary and secondary schools, which receive public funds.   Thanks to this law, we can guarantee free access to quality education adequately funded by the State, which is also inclusive and that will generate synergies between students.   In the medium term, our goal is that all schools achieve equivalent levels of excellence and inclusion, and become the cornerstone of the Chile that we all dream about.   There are other measures –such as free higher education, which we will begin to implement next year. We seek to ensure that education, at all levels stops being a consumer good, dependent on families ability to pay and become a social right that ensures access and quality for everyone and as a generator of opportunities and social mobility.   When all the children and young people have equal opportunities to acquire knowledge and skills, and may learn from the diversity of the world that surround them, we will have taken giant steps towards our goal. We will be closer to having a just, prosperous and equitable society.   For this reason, I fully agree with Andrés Bello, founder of the most important public university in Chile, when he stated that education is one of the most important tasks which a Government can tackle because it is “a primary and urgent necessity; the basis for all progress and the indispensable foundation of republican institutions.”   Friends:  This concern for building a better society, in which the basic principles of equality and dignity prevail, as said early by Vives and Bartolomé de las Casas, in which there is “some balance” in social relations and justice, democracy and prosperity, is not unique to a group of people or a country. It is concern shared by many.   In Latin America, each nation has built and gone their own way; but the goal, the dream, has almost always been the same.   In fact, less than a decade ago, in Santiago de Chile, the representatives of the Iberoamerican Community of Nations, committed ourselves to work toward increasing levels of inclusion, justice, protection and social assistance, and to strengthen the idea of solidarity, belonging and identity.  And there was agreement that to meet this goal it is necessary, among other things, to ensure universal access to social services and public benefits of quality, eradicate all forms of discrimination, recover public spaces for social and cultural life, and strengthen Iberoamerican cooperation.  We also recognized that to deal with the problems of the region we must encourage a broad social dialogue. A dialogue that will allow Governments, employers, workers and citizens to join efforts to create wealth, decent work and human development in a context of justice, equality and inclusion.  Surely, in a few hours, at the Second Summit of the European Union-CELAC, to be held in Brussels under the motto “Shaping our common future: work for prosperous, cohesive and sustainable societies for our citizen”, we will make a new appeal to work towards these objectives.   I hope that this instance will allow us to renew our commitment to these objectives, which are the noblest causes of politics and public life. And I hope that we shall find transatlantic areas of cooperation that will allow us to move forward together, faster, in the direction indicated, which is none other than that which leads to Utopia, the ideal society with which we dream.   We know that to reach that place seems impossible. However, it continues to be our beacon. Eduardo Galeano, a world renowned Uruguayan writer, described it thus:  “Utopia is on the horizon. I take two steps forward, she takes two steps back and the horizon moves ten steps beyond. Then what is utopia for? ‘For that, to continue walking’”.   We can and we must walk together towards these new horizons. We can and we must do more to improve our laws and institutions, our organizations, our culture. We can and we must do more to multiply and improve our spaces of encounter, dialogue and of citizen deliberation.   We can and we must maintain this flag raised to ensure the steady expansion of equality, inclusion, cohesion, justice and shared prosperity to our people.  This is the target that we have set in Chile, and towards that we are walking confident and steadily.  DISCURSO DE S.E. LA PRESIDENTA DE LA REPÚBLICA, MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, PARA SU CLASE MAGISTRAL EN LA UNIVERSIDAD CATÓLICA DE LOVAINA (KU LEUVEN):  EQUIDAD Y COHESIÓN SOCIAL PARA LA DEMOCRACIA (traducción)  Lovaina, 10 de junio de 2015   Amigas y amigos:  Es un honor estar aquí con ustedes, en una de las instituciones educativas más antiguas del mundo (casi 600 años) y una de las más grandes e importantes de Bélgica. La distinción que hoy me otorgan –este Doctorado Honoris Causa- me llena de orgullo y alegría, y crea, entre nosotros, un vínculo profundo.  Sé muy bien que esta universidad, cuya rica historia es inseparable de la de Europa, ha constituido, siempre, tanto por su privilegiada ubicación geográfica como por su reconocida calidad académica, un distinguido lugar de encuentro y análisis, de investigación y de generación de ideas.       Por esta casa y por esta tierra –Flandes- pasaron grandes pensadores, algunos de los más destacados humanistas e íconos del Renacimiento. Pienso en Erasmo de Rotterdam, Tomás Moro y Juan Luis Vives, quienes construyeron una obra monumental, en la que se expresa su interés por las personas, por el orden social y político, por las instituciones humanas, por la educación y su vínculo con lo divino.  Vives, uno de los pensadores españoles de más renombre en el mundo, tuvo una particular preocupación por la igualdad y dignidad del ser humano, que manifestó incluso al referirse a la situación de los pueblos originarios de América. Con sus ideas anticipó y, sin duda, influyó en el mayor defensor de los indígenas, el fraile dominico Bartolomé de las Casas, y en muchos otros, por cierto.   Esta línea de pensamiento está presente en todos quienes trabajamos por la igualdad y la justicia en las relaciones sociales. Evidentemente, el contexto actual es otro, y las relaciones de poder y dominación que existían entonces –en la era colonial- ya no existen, afortunadamente. Pero, especialmente en América Latina, prevalecen las injusticias y las inequidades, y una pequeña élite sigue concentrando el poder y disfrutando del bienestar que podría y debería ser compartido por todos.    La tarea que nos hemos propuesto en Chile apunta justamente a dar respuesta a tal problema, a reconfigurar los lazos que nos unen, balancear las relaciones y alcanzar amplios acuerdos que nos permitan construir una sociedad mejor.      Algo similar hicieron los países europeos luego de la Segunda Guerra Mundial. De la desolación surgió un nuevo espíritu de solidaridad y cooperación que permitió la construcción de una red pública de apoyo, el Modelo Social Europeo, y sociedades más equitativas y prósperas.     Por cierto, el contexto europeo ha cambiado desde 1945, pero todavía el modelo está en duda. Esto no hace más que demostrar que las sociedades están en constante transformación, y que es necesario ir adaptando las políticas, las instituciones y organizaciones a los contextos históricos y a las realidades de cada país. Y mucho de ese ajuste es el resultado de las reflexiones e investigaciones que se llevan a cabo en universidades como ésta.    De hecho, creo que una de las tareas fundamentales de instituciones universitarias como ésta, y particularmente de quienes se dedican a las ciencias sociales, consiste en estudiar la realidad, detectar anomalías y tensiones, y pensar y proponer soluciones, como -por ejemplo la que vemos hoy en Chile- la formulación de reformas institucionales y políticas.   Aquella es una labor fundamental de la universidad, y de los científicos sociales, pero no la única. También es la de imaginar un mundo mejor, el pensar y discutir cuáles deberían ser los grandes ideales y sueños que dan sentido al quehacer social y político.    Por ello, creo que el espacio en el que nos encontramos es el lugar idóneo para conversar sobre el tipo de sociedad y democracia que anhelamos, para Chile, América Latina y Europa, y sobre qué podemos hacer para forjarla.   Hoy, me gustaría compartir lo que estamos haciendo en Chile para avanzar hacia aquel ideal que ilumina y muestra el camino, y que Tomás Moro llamó Utopía.     Quiero partir clarificando mi propio anhelo, que creo comparto con muchos de mis compatriotas hombres y mujeres: para mí (y comprendo que cada quien puede tener su propia visión), aquella sociedad soñada debe ser, a la vez, próspera y justa. Y éstas son condiciones que se retroalimentan y refuerzan mutuamente.  La sociedad debe generar las bases -objetivas y subjetivas- que promuevan el bienestar de todos, y la realización de proyectos individuales y colectivos, guiados por valores como la cooperación y la solidaridad.  Debe ser una sociedad que garantice derechos y oportunidades, pero también deberes y compensaciones que aseguren que todos puedan aprovechar las oportunidades creadas y que nadie se quede atrás.   Debe ser una sociedad democrática e inclusiva, en la que las diferencias se valoren y los conflictos se resuelvan mediante el diálogo y la participación.    Y para que todo ello sea posible, para que efectivamente podamos caminar hacia esa sociedad ideal, se debe alcanzar un grado importante de equidad y cohesión social.   Ya decía el teólogo y teólogo Reinhold Niebuhr que "un poco de equilibrio (...) es la base de cualquier justicia que se logre en las relaciones humanas."  Porque allí, donde existen desigualdades (o desequilibrios), algunos pocos pueden imponer su voluntad, su visión del mundo y sus intereses sobre muchos que están impedidos de satisfacer sus necesidades y realizar sus sueños. Y, en consecuencia, no hay justicia.   Sin un mínimo de equidad -y la promesa de que ésta mejorará- difícilmente lograremos que todos y todas se comprometan a trabajar con entusiasmo por un proyecto común. Y eso no es sólo un problema para lo público y la "comunidad nacional" (en abstracto), sino también de cada individuo, de cada familia y del desarrollo económico y humano a mediano y largo plazo.   Sin un acceso equitativo y universal a bienes y servicios públicos de calidad, imperarán -como de hecho vemos que imperan- las lógicas de mercado. La competencia será el único modo de relación, el “sálvese quien pueda” será el lema, y no habrá cohesión, ni cooperación posible, ni solidaridad. Todo ello atenta contra la estabilidad y el desarrollo de cualquier democracia moderna sólida. Y atenta contra las bases del pacto social, que es lograr el mayor bienestar posible para todos.   Porque, como decía Tomás Moro -en un contexto muy distinto al actual pero que no parece tan lejano- "todo el mundo sabe que si no se preocupa de sí mismo, se moriría de hambre, aunque el Estado sea floreciente. Esto le lleva a ver la necesidad de no interesarse por las cosas del Estado”.    En un escenario como ése -que no dista del que observamos en América Latina- en el que el "bien común" es percibido por muchos como ajeno, y lo público es poco valorado -en gran medida porque no da respuestas satisfactorias a los problemas cotidianos-, es difícil exigir a hombres y mujeres que trabajen en pos de objetivos compartidos. Y sin ese esfuerzo de todos y todas, es difícil avanzar unidos y llegar a destino.    Esto explica por qué me enfoco en la igualdad y la cohesión cuando pienso en el futuro de nuestros pueblos, y por qué en mi país estamos llevando a cabo reformas que apuntan justamente a reducir las inequidades y la segregación social.      Ahora bien, si lo que queremos es generar transformaciones reales debemos partir por tener un diagnóstico acertado. ¿Qué tan lejos estamos, en Latinoamérica, de aquella sociedad anhelada? ¿Las reformas son urgentes o pueden esperar a que el contexto sea "más propicio", como piden algunos, independiente de cuál sea realmente el contexto?   Sabemos que en la región aún existen importantes focos de pobreza.  Sabemos que las brechas entre ricos y pobres se han profundizado, y que la nuestra es la región más desigual del planeta.   Sabemos que muchos de nuestros coterráneos son excluidos, y que no tienen acceso a servicios básicos ni a oportunidades de progreso. Esto afecta principalmente a los niños y jóvenes del continente, a las mujeres, a nuestros pueblos originarios, a los afrodescendientes y a quienes viven en zonas rurales.   Y sabemos que nuestras sociedades están poco cohesionadas, lo que se explica tanto por aquel desigual acceso a servicios y oportunidades, como por el creciente individualismo y la consecuente dificultad de articular proyectos colectivos de los que todos y todas se sientan parte.      Déjenme darles algunos ejemplos:   A pesar de la importante reducción de la pobreza que la región experimentó en las últimas décadas, 165 millones de personas siguen siendo pobres. Es decir, 3 de cada 10 personas y 69 millones viven en la extrema pobreza.   Y hay un dato que es particularmente preocupante: la elevada pobreza infantil. La CEPAL estima que en la región hay 70,5 millones de niños, niñas y adolescentes pobres. Es decir, 4 de cada 10.   Este es un urgente llamado de atención, porque debemos estar conscientes de que esta realidad, junto con proyectar un futuro poco promisorio para estos niños y niñas, abre un signo de interrogación sobre el futuro de América Latina.   Por otro lado, con respecto a la desigualdad económica, vemos que el quintil de los hogares con menores ingresos capta el 5,6% de los ingresos totales, mientras que el quintil más rico se queda con el 46,7%.   Lamentablemente, ésta es una tendencia que se agudiza, y no sólo en nuestro continente. Ayer, en la OECD, estábamos discutiendo que la desigualdad en el mundo es más grande ahora: los ricos se vuelven más ricos y los pobres más pobres. Según un estudio reciente de OXFAM, el 1% más rico del planeta posee el 48% de la riqueza, y se espera que esta cifra llegue al 54% el 2019.   Y si afinamos la mirada este hecho es más dramático: hoy las 80 personas más ricas del mundo poseen la misma porción de la torta que los 3.600 millones de hombres y mujeres más pobres. No creo que haya alguien que pueda decir que el estado de las cosas sea justo.  En cuanto a la desigualdad de acceso a servicios, notamos –por ejemplo- que 4 de cada 10 familias no cuentan con un techo para vivir o habitan en viviendas de mala calidad. Este porcentaje supera el 70% en países como Nicaragua, Bolivia y Perú.  En tanto, el 33% de la población rural de la región no cuenta con servicios básicos de saneamiento, y el 36% no cuenta con agua potable.  Revertir estas brechas y avanzar hacia la construcción de una sociedad justa y desarrollada implica combatir la pobreza y la exclusión, generar condiciones de equidad, y abrir espacios de encuentro de la diversidad que permitan la gestación de una identidad compartida y una comunión de intereses y valores.    Usualmente tiende a pensarse –y en América Latina prevalece esta idea- que sólo pueden generarse estas condiciones de equidad e inclusión si un país es rico, donde la cantidad total de riqueza es tan grande que puede repartirse entre todos.   Sin embargo, la experiencia internacional -y creo que la historia de Europa es clara en tal sentido- nos muestra que esto no es así.    Hace un tiempo, un ministro noruego me comentó algo que pocos recuerdan cuando hablan del camino al éxito de los países desarrollados, en especial de los nórdicos (que son los que tienen los mayores estándares de vida y mejores índices de equidad y desarrollo humano).   Él me dijo “no es cierto que hoy Noruega sea un país incluyente porque sea rico. Nosotros, luego de la Guerra Mundial, éramos muy pobres, y lo que decidimos fue que debíamos tener una estrategia inclusiva, que incluyera a hombres y mujeres, que incluyera a todos los niños y niñas, y gracias a eso es que somos ricos, y no al revés”.   Este ejemplo nos muestra que cuando hablamos de equidad, inclusión y cohesión no nos estamos refiriendo sólo a principios éticos (sobre los que podemos estar legítimamente en desacuerdo), nos estamos refiriendo también a un imperativo estratégico. Hablamos de factores esenciales para el desarrollo para alcanzar la prosperidad compartida de la que nos habla el Banco Mundial, así como la estabilidad política y la paz social.    Hoy disponemos de mucha evidencia empírica –avalada incluso por economistas del FMI- que muestra que la fragmentación social y la desigualdad de renta dificultan los logros económicos.  Además, debemos tener en cuenta que la inequidad, la exclusión de grandes segmentos de la población y la fragmentación social crean malestar y pueden, si no actuamos con decisión y a tiempo, debilitar la legitimidad de nuestros sistemas políticos y económicos.   Lo mismo puede ocurrir si se frustran las crecientes expectativas de progreso y cambio sustantivo que observamos en buena parte de las sociedades contemporáneas –incluidas las europeas. Esto quedó en evidencia –en el caso chileno- con el recientemente publicado "Informe de Desarrollo Humano en Chile", elaborado por el Programa de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo.  Todo lo anterior evidencia que estamos aún muy lejos de la sociedad que anhelamos, y nos demuestra de que el tiempo para la acción, el "contexto propicio", es ahora.   Es por esto que en Chile estamos construyendo consensos y poniendo mucha energía en generar igualdad de derechos y oportunidades, y equidad e inclusión en distintos frentes, como el tributario, el educativo, el laboral, el político, en la niñez, en los derechos de las mujeres y en la juventud y en el género, entre otros.   Estamos haciendo grandes esfuerzos por acortar las brechas sociales y evitar que segmentos de la población queden rezagados, por acabar con las injustas desigualdades y por integrar a los excluidos.  Nuestro propósito -como he dicho en otras oportunidades- es doble. Queremos que cada ciudadano, independiente de su condición social, política, cultural, sexual, geográfica o étnica, logre desarrollar sus potencialidades y tener un buen vivir. Y, por otro lado, queremos que todos y cada uno de ellos pueda y quiera aportar al desarrollo común del país.   Buscamos, en síntesis, desarrollar capacidades personales y fortalezas colectivas, y las múltiples reformas que estamos implementando apuntan justamente en esa dirección.  Por ejemplo, hemos llevado adelante una reforma tributaria, la mayor de su tipo en los últimos 30 años, que suscitó grandes discusiones y controversias, pero que finalmente obtuvo un apoyo transversal en nuestro Congreso.   Es una reforma que permite repartir la carga de manera más equitativa, más justa, de forma que los que tienen más aporten más. Y nos asegura financiamiento permanente para aquellas transformaciones, especialmente en educación y protección social, que comprometimos y que fueron respaldadas por la ciudadanía.   También llevamos adelante algunas reformas políticas muy relevantes, esencialmente democratizadoras. Entre ellas una que marca un hito histórico: logramos, hace pocas semanas, reemplazar el sistema electoral binominal legado por la dictadura, diseñado expresamente para degradar el poder del voto y generar un empate permanente -en el poder legislativo- entre las dos principales coaliciones políticas.   El nuevo sistema, que es proporcional, nos permitirá tener una democracia más representativa, inclusiva y legítima a los ojos de los ciudadanos, en la que cada voto valga lo que verdaderamente le corresponde.   Junto con ello, avanzamos hacia la equidad de género con la nueva Ley de Cuotas, que establece que, en adelante, al menos el 40% de las candidaturas deberán ser femeninas.   Pero debemos reconocer que mientras existan ciudadanos excluidos, o que no participan en política en igualdad de condiciones, tal ideal estará impedido de materializarse.   Mientras las mujeres, que en mi país constituyen más del 50% de la población, se mantengan subrepresentadas en el Congreso y el Gobierno, seguirá siendo cierto aquello que la destacada abogada paraguaya, Serafina Dávalos, afirmó en el Primer Congreso Femenino Internacional de 1910: “el carácter democrático del Estado es puro “mito”, porque la “democracia”, que supone como conditio sine qua non la igualdad, la libertad… no podría admitir privilegios de nacimiento, haber nacido varón o mujer”.    Por tal razón, y porque tenemos la certeza de que el aporte de las mujeres es fundamental para el progreso económico y social, mi Gobierno ha dado prioridad al trabajo por la equidad de género.   De hecho, una de las primeras medidas que adopté al asumir la Presidencia, en marzo del año pasado, fue enviar al Congreso el proyecto de ley que crea el Ministerio de la Mujer y la Equidad de Género, con el fin de fortalecer la institucionalidad requerida para promover y garantizar los derechos de todas mis compatriotas. Y con alegría les cuento que esta ley ya fue promulgada, por lo que el nuevo Ministerio comenzará a operar prontamente.   También, hemos impulsado otras políticas orientadas a salvaguardar principios tan básicos como el derecho a la vida, a la libertad y a la seguridad.  Sin embargo, aún hay vacíos para la oportunidad de tener trabajos iguales, salarios iguales. Porque en mi primer Gobierno, envíe una ley, pero en ese entonces me dijeron que iba contra la Constitución proponer algo como eso. Ésa la razón, ésa es una de las muchas razones por las que necesitamos una nueva Constitución en Chile. No permitiremos que ninguna constitución restrinja los derechos y oportunidades de hombre y mujeres en nuestro país.     Respecto al derecho a la vida, tener un buen vivir, por ejemplo, para amparar a las víctimas de la violencia, que en Chile provoca alrededor de 40 femicidios al año, estamos duplicando las Casas de Acogida y vamos a aumentar en un 25% los Centros de la Mujer y Niñas, que entregan apoyo y asistencia oportuna a quienes la necesitan. Además, estamos implementando medidas que fortalecerán la autonomía económica de las mujeres, lo que creemos es esencial para que puedan tener vidas satisfactorias, y para disminuir su vulnerabilidad frente a los abusos y la violencia.  Pero si hablamos de políticas que promueven la igualdad, la más importante de ella está actualmente enfocada en la educación.   Este es un tema particularmente relevante –y así lo entendimos desde muy temprano-, porque es en esta área que están depositadas las esperanzas de las nuevas generaciones y sus familias, y allí reside en buena cuenta el futuro de la nación, su capacidad de progreso, de cohesión y de democratización.    Decía el jurista y político argentino Amancio Alcorta que la educación, en particular la pública, “tiene por objeto y por resultado despertar las energías adormecidas y restituir a los hombres y a los pueblos la plenitud de sus fuerzas”. Y agregaba que mientras la ignorancia condena a vivir bajo perpetua tutela, la educación prepara para todas las emancipaciones.   Así, decimos que por medio del sistema educativo, podemos entregar las herramientas indispensables para el desarrollo pleno de cada individuo, preparar a los niños, niñas y jóvenes para la vida en sociedad y fortalecer las bases de la democracia.   Y para ello, la escuela debiera ser un espacio de aprendizaje, de integración y valoración de la diferencia, de promoción de la igualdad cívica y de contacto con la experiencia democrática. Es decir, el espacio republicano por excelencia.  Lamentablemente, en Chile -y en América Latina en general- tal ideal está lejos de concretarse. Si bien en las últimas décadas hemos avanzado significativamente en cobertura y acceso a la educación, tenemos un serio déficit en calidad y, peor aún, contamos con sistemas altamente segregados que no sólo no favorecen la integración sino que además refuerzan las desigualdades sociales.  En mi país, tenemos un sistema escolar mixto, compuesto por escuelas particulares pagadas, escuelas particulares subvencionadas por el Estado y escuelas públicas gestionadas por los gobiernos locales (los municipios).   Muchas de estas escuelas –muchas de las particulares- cobran altos aranceles y seleccionan a sus estudiantes, y otras –una parte de las particulares que reciben fondos públicos- exigen un pago adicional de las familias. Así, hemos generado un sistema altamente segregador, en el que los ricos estudian con los ricos y los pobres estudian con los pobres.   Esto significa que durante muchos años en Chile se ha suscrito la lucro privado con fondos públicos. Pero, sobre todo, significa que hemos perpetuado oportunidades y capacidades desiguales, así como creado redes sociales y visiones de mundo divisoras.  Esto ha dañado profundamente el tejido social, ha contribuido a ensanchar las brechas y, en consecuencia, impedido que chilenos y chilenas compartan una visión de país, vivan la diversidad y construyan canales de cooperación.   En resumen, no contribuye a la construcción de un país inclusivo y democrático que buscamos.  Además, las prácticas antes mencionadas -me refiero a la selección y el copago- eliminan el efecto positivo que los niños y niñas de mejor desempeño tienen sobre los menos aventajados, lo que compromete la calidad del sistema en su conjunto.  Está ampliamente comprobado que el aprendizaje de los niños más vulnerables mejora en forma significativa cuando comparten la sala de clases con otros de mayor capital cultural. Este efecto –llamado efecto pares- desaparece en escuelas altamente segregadas como las nuestras, generando condiciones poco propicias para el desarrollo de los menos favorecidos.    Éstas son justamente algunas de las deficiencias del sistema educativo que queremos corregir, y que de hecho estamos corrigiendo. Hace pocos días, promulgamos la "Ley de Inclusión" que termina con la práctica de que las familias deben pagar una parte de la mensualidad en las escuelas privadas que reciben fondos públicos. Además, elimina el proceso de selección y el lucro en todas las escuelas primarias y secundarias, que reciben fondos públicos.  Gracias a esta ley, podremos garantizar el acceso gratuito a una educación de calidad, financiada adecuadamente por el Estado, que permita la cooperación y genere sinergias entre los estudiantes.    A mediano plazo, nuestra meta es que todos los liceos y colegios, públicos, subvencionados por el Estado o particulares pagados, alcancen niveles equivalentes de excelencia e inclusión, y se transformen en la piedra angular del Chile que soñamos.  Hay otras medidas -como la gratuidad en el nivel superior, que empezaremos a implementar el próximo año. Buscamos que, en todos los niveles, la educación deje de ser un bien de consumo, dependiente de la capacidad de pago de las familias, y se consagre como un bien público y un derecho social que garantice acceso y calidad para todos y sea un generador de oportunidades y movilidad social.  Cuando todos los niños, niñas y jóvenes tengan las mismas oportunidades de adquirir conocimientos y competencias y puedan enriquecerse de la diversidad del mundo que los rodea, habremos dado pasos gigantes hacia nuestra meta. Estaremos más cerca de contar con una sociedad justa, próspera y equitativa. Por esto, coincido plenamente con Andrés Bello, fundador de la más importante universidad pública en Chile, cuando afirma que la educación es una de las más importantes tareas que el Gobierno debe enfrentar porque es "una necesidad primaria y urgente; la base de todo progreso y el cimiento indispensable de las instituciones republicanas".  Amigos:    Esta preocupación por construir una sociedad mejor, en la que primen los principios básicos de igualdad y dignidad enunciados tempranamente por Vives y Bartolomé de las Casas, en la que exista "algo de equilibrio" en las relaciones sociales y justicia, democracia y prosperidad, no es exclusiva de un grupo de personas ni de un país. Es una inquietud compartida por muchos.  En América Latina, cada nación ha construido y seguido su propio camino, pero el objetivo, el sueño, ha sido casi siempre el mismo.      De hecho, hace poco menos de una década, los jefes y jefas de Estado y de Gobierno de los países miembros de la Comunidad Iberoamericana de Naciones, reunidos en Santiago de Chile, nos comprometimos a trabajar para alcanzar niveles crecientes de inclusión, justicia, protección y asistencia social, y a fortalecer los sentimientos de solidaridad, de pertenencia e identidad.   Y hubo un acuerdo en que para cumplir esta meta es necesario, entre otras cosas, garantizar el acceso universal a los servicios sociales y prestaciones públicas de calidad, erradicar todo tipo de discriminación, recuperar espacios públicos para la vida social y cultural, y fortalecer la cooperación iberoamericana.  También reconocimos que para hacer frente a los problemas de la región debemos propiciar un diálogo social amplio, que permita que gobiernos, empresarios, trabajadores y ciudadanos aúnen esfuerzos para crear riqueza, trabajo digno y desarrollo humano en un contexto de justicia, equidad e inclusión.    Seguramente, en unas pocas horas, en el marco de la Segunda Cumbre de la Unión Europea-CELAC, que se realizará en Bruselas bajo el lema “Modelar nuestro futuro en común: trabajar por unas sociedades prósperas, cohesivas y sostenibles para nuestros ciudadanos”, haremos un nuevo llamado a trabajar por objetivos similares.   Espero que esta instancia sirva para que renovemos nuestro compromiso con tales causas, y para que encontremos áreas de cooperación transatlánticas que nos permitan avanzar juntos, más velozmente, en la dirección indicada, que no es otra que aquella que lleva a la Utopía, a la sociedad ideal con la que soñamos.    Sabemos que llegar a ese lugar parece imposible. Sin embargo, sigue siendo nuestro faro. Eduardo Galeano, un reconocido escritor uruguayo, lo describió así:  "La utopía está en el horizonte. Doy dos pasos hacia adelante, ella da dos pasos hacia atrás y el horizonte se corre diez pasos más allá. Entonces, ¿para qué es la utopía? ‘Para eso: para continuar caminando’".   Podemos y debemos hacer más para mejorar nuestras leyes e instituciones, nuestras organizaciones, nuestra cultura. Podemos y debemos hacer más para multiplicar y mejorar nuestros espacios de encuentro, de diálogo y de deliberación ciudadana.   Podemos y debemos mantener esta bandera levantada para asegurar la constante expansión de la igualdad, la inclusión, la cohesión, la justicia y la prosperidad compartida para nuestro pueblo.  Éste es el objetivo que nos hemos puesto en Chile, y hacia el que estamos caminando con confianza y de manera constante.