SPEECH BY H.E. MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, REPUBLIC OF CHILE’S PRESIDENT,  TO THE WORLD LEADERS FORUM, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY   New York, September 26th, 2015  Dear friends,  Firstly I would like to thank Columbia University for inviting me to share some thoughts about the challenges that democracies are facing. In the case of Chile, it is an opportunity to reflect 25 years after the end of a dictatorship, which cast a shadow over our history of freedom and democracy.  As Professor Bollinger mentioned, three years ago, this University honored me with a Doctor Honoris Causa, awarded at that time in recognition of my leadership on women´s issues in the United Nations. Now I return as President of Chile, elected for the second time, to share with you some ideas about issues that pose urgent challenges for our countries. And I wanna make it from the perspective not in academia, but from the perspective on somebody who has exercised on government, that gives a different perspective.   I also wanna thank Columbia for establishing one of its eight global centers in Chile and thus for contributing to the debate on public policy, especially as regards water, renewable energies and the ageing of the population.  And of course I wanna greet my compatriots studying at the University, -and some of them who are not student but they live here, in New York- many of whom are helped by the Chilean public system of study scholarship.    I think that our society in Latino America has had a lot of changes. And we also still have the challenges of being one of the continents with the biggest inequalities. We have, of course, great –I would say- advances in terms of on that something I spoke yesterday in the United Nations, when we accorded the new development goals, the 8 MDG for now and for next 15 years that we still to tackle poverty, we still have to reduce inequality, we still have to ensure and help to dignify work, to good salaries, etc. All social economic challenges there’re still in Latin America that I mentioned that means it still is the most unequal continent of the world. But we have done, looking for MDG; the continent has decreased remarkably maternal mortality, infant mortality, and so on.   And for Chile, inequality is still a very important issue that we’re working on our program of government. We’re working through a big tax reform that it´ll give us permanent money for very important reforms that we’re carrying on like Education Reform, to ensure education for all, with quality but also free of charges, so no families could get left behind because they don’t have the resources. We’re working on improving Health System, we’re working improving gender inequality, and we’re working on trying to end all inequalities, in terms of geographical inequalities, indigenous inequalities: we can tackle and confront them.   But today, I’m not gonna speak about this.   Let me, first speak about the state of democracy, 25 year later, because we’ve seen new phenomenon, but I think it’s important for us to think about it, understand it and see it where there’re some opportunities.   First, let me emphasize how different today’s world is from that of a quarter of a century ago.  Whereas at the end of the 1980s most countries did not choose their governments by means of democratic procedures, today the opposite is true.  Even with all the difficulties entailed, democracy is now the rule and not the exception.  This trend is particularly marked in Latin America. Forty years ago, in 1975, only four countries had democratic governments and dictatorships prevailed, in a long night that lasted well into the 1980s.  Today, the vast majority of our nations have institutions and governments created by the sovereignty of the people. Democracy is our political reality.  For those who have grown up in mature democratic systems, it is probably not easy to appreciate the impact this produced. But for those of us who have suffered the curtailment of life and freedom that a dictatorship represents, the change that the continent has undergone is remarkable.  For us Latin Americans, the ability to elect those who should lead our countries and to have an autonomous Congress and an independent judiciary is a fundamental value to be defended. There has been too much grief in our history for us not to protect what we’ve been able to recover.   Now we find that this picture of widespread democracy – and now I am speaking not only regionally but also globally – is facing new challenges. Because we know that it is no longer enough to elect governments in formally competitive elections, nor to select our representatives and give them the power to take decisions on our behalf.  These essential but insufficient prerequisites are competing with other more pressing ones. Some challenges are not new and concern the quality of democracy, such as the issue of transparency, the relationship between politics and money and the distance between the elite and society.  But there are other criteria that are indeed new and are related to the proactive role of citizens and the crisis of confidence affecting societies all over the world.  I shall address these latter elements in greater detail.  So let me speak about Representative democracy versus non-conventional forms of political participation  What lies behind these new issues affecting the quality of our democracy?  The classic conceptions of representative democracy – such as those developed by political scientists, such as Robert Dahl – have needed to cope with the eruption on the public stage of citizen groups, which often defy conventional forms of political action.  The whole world witnessed the process known as the “Arab Spring” or what has happened in Spain and Greece, to mention some examples.  Once again, facts have put theory to the test.  What are the characteristics of this emerging phenomenon? And I’m not gonna mention all, I´m gonna mention some of them.   Although this new form of political citizenship takes very diverse forms, there are some common features such as, firstly, active participation by a new middle class forged in democracy and in a period of greater economic prosperity and our ability to influence the agenda beyond electoral periods.  Secondly, the demands differ from classic ones, for example, by the workers’ movement. Historically workers demanded increased participation in the distribution of social wealth -this is also something that it’s important still there- but the new political activists have constructed a platform that goes beyond –if I may say- a second-tier demands such as quality of politics, improved education or quality of life in urban centers.  Thirdly, this new social activism usually bypasses traditional political parties or structures. In fact, these have often been ignored in their attempts to “take the lead” in articulating the demands of these movements. Criticism of parties, of their leaders and of governments has become a central part of the agenda of public discourse, particularly in the demand for greater integrity, the end of corrupt practices and the demand for more participation.   Let me talk about a little about confidence in leaders and institutions, and the integrity question and the need for new accountability and transparency mechanisms  I shall dwell for a moment on this last point.  What yesterday was regarded as “normal” can now no longer be seen as such. And I say this not only because of the ethical imperative to build a firewall against corruption, but also because this state of affairs has created a crisis of trust in the relationship between citizens, institutions and their leaders.  This point directly affects the governance of our democracies and the daily exercise of the institutional responsibilities of governments. In information society where public opinion is volatile, formal legitimacy to govern and pursue public policies is no longer enough. Today what is needed is an almost daily endorsement by citizens, expressed in surveys, in the media and in networks.  And this opinion is not dictated principally by formal or procedural criteria but by ethical preferences and by the value of the public domain. Citizens are increasingly demanding transparency, accountability and an end to domination of the public domain by private interests.  In other words, citizens are demanding that their leaders do the work for which they were elected, which is to really watch over the general interest and defend the shared sense of a public “us” against the abuses and privileges of powerful minorities.  Chilean democracy is stable and its levels of transparency have traditionally been high.  But we are not immune to this phenomenon of growing demands.  And we have also experienced the pressure they place on the exercise of government and on the work of political parties.  But we want a stronger and more civic democracy.  We see this phenomenon not as a threat but as an opportunity.  For this reason, we have not wasted time on hand-wringing or theoretical self-criticism, but we have decided to face up to the challenges and get moving.  We have listened to these new demands of society and are responding by implementing a broad pro-transparency and anti-corruption agenda, as well as by improving the quality of our democracy.  Basically, we are making changes to our political system and in the workings of the political parties, with special attention to electoral processes.  Hopefully there will soon be stricter regulation and oversight of electoral financing, ending the incestuous relationship between business and politics; representatives involved in corrupt acts will lose their seats; the use of insider information will be punished and there will be greater transparency for actions of those with public administration responsibilities, to mention some examples in the public sector.  Other thing that we’ve already done is that we changed the electoral system, there was a binominal to more representative one, and for the first time, finally we have, we approved the quota of 40 per cent female candidates as an obligation for all parties. But I wanna a 40% of elected ones, but I cannot afford everything. But I though in my experience you can always, you know you can always look that you’re doing something that you’re really finding the way not to do it. So the interesting thing is that this law has incentivized not to break the law. So, any political party doesn’t inscribe 40 per cent of female candidate, they won’t be able to inscribe any candidate at all.  So it’s 40 per cent, or it has nothing. And the second incentive, because you can have female candidate that they’ll never be elected, so, parties are to be able to elect more women, they will receive economic rewards, because we really want that this to be a reality.   Measures will also be taken that affect the private sector, particularly as regards private corruption and corporate leadership of large companies.  There are much more, I just mentioned some main issues. This is a broad and ambitious agenda but one that cannot be postponed:  today our citizens will no longer tolerate the continuation of bad practices that result only in distortion of their wishes and deliver a huge blow to democracy.   So as always the question from the government point of view is what is to be done?  And this question today involves a new challenge.  Because the new citizen activism entails a limit on the power that governments and parties have always possessed.  This means that these, in addition to improving their formal instruments, must find new room for action, particularly through what has been called “soft power”, such as cooperation, civic education and networking.     Even with this new scope for action, the road will not be an easy one.  We have to overcome inertia, to eradicate deeply rooted practices and to combat the fear of change often felt in our societies after centuries of traumatic experiments.  And it is not easy to end decades and even centuries of confusion between what is public and what is private and of entrenched practices whereby the public domain is held hostage by corporate groups.   But it is essential for us to take charge and to act.  Not only because there is no time to lose but also because, if we are to regain the citizens’ trust, we must act with conviction, even if there can be no immediate results.  Because the greatest public good and the most fragile one, which has been threatened by bad practices in the State, politics and business, is public trust.  The lack of trust in the political system and these non-conventional types of political action by citizens pose at least two dangers.  The first is absenteeism, when the majority of citizens no longer trust in the power of their vote. The second is populism, when incendiary discourse and “band-aid” solutions replace the sense of responsibility and institutionalization that every government, whatever its ideology, should have.     So we believe that it is possible to mitigate both dangers. But this requires courage and innovation. Courage to relinquish part of the power which the political class has always considered as its birthright; and innovation to imagine mechanisms and practices that will embrace civic activism and restore confidence in the institutions of democracy.    The goal is not to change the inertia of institutions by street mobilization but to inject civic vitality into the institutions of democracy.  Without looking any further, there already exist in the international arena practices and rules on consultations with special interest groups.  One example is the mechanism embodied in Convention No. 169 of the International Labor Organization, concerning the impact of policies and projects in areas of indigenous influence; another are the procedures for taking into account the views of affected citizens in the environmental impact evaluation of investment initiatives, currently in force in various countries.  Some developed countries have a tradition of Green Papers, which – as you know – are drafts of public policy submitted for public comment, using the methods provided by technology. In Chile, we have frequently used this mechanism, -and this is confirmed by the facts- because we are convinced that a policy will be better and more acceptable -or other way, I mean, another way it will be more legitimate- if citizen feel that they’re being a part in its formulation.  So we must be daring and innovative.  In a rapidly changing world, where citizens are so radically altering their types of action, the danger to governance lies not in change but in doing nothing.  I am convinced that it is only by innovating on arrangements for citizen inclusion and participation that we shall be able to speak of the re-legitimization of democratic institutions.  In other words, to paraphrase Willy Brandt, in order to tackle the problems of democracy we need more democracy.  In academia, you have the space to explore ways of identifying these forms of citizen participation, in order to restore their trust in the political system.  I invite you to think of Latin America, I invite you to think of Chile.  We are ready to listen and to learn.  Dear friends,  We have experienced a quarter of a century of democratic revitalization. Today more people in more countries are electing their leaders in competitive elections and we value that.    However, as I was saying, there are new challenges to the quality of our democracy, mainly because our citizens are demanding participation and government transparently.  If I had to propose a simple formula, I would say that the virtuous circle on which the health of democracy depends is better representation, better effective participation and of course very high standards of probity.  Columbia University is an academic center of global scope.  Here the world is viewed in its broadest diversity from a broad range of disciplines.  With its status as a global university, Columbia can make a huge contribution to the debate on how these pivotal components of democracy can interact and complement each other.  An illustrious alumnus of this University said almost eight decades ago: “The ultimate rulers of our democracy are not a President and Senators and Congressmen and government officials but the voters of this country”.  Today FDR - Franklin Delano Roosevelt -would probably say that the real rulers of a democracy are the citizens.  Thank you.  *****  New York, September 26th, 2015   DISCURSO DE S.E. LA PRESIDENTA DE LA REPÚBLICA, MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA,  EN EL FORO DE LÍDERES MUNDIALES, EN LA UNIVERSIDAD DE COLUMBIA (Traducción)  Nueva York, 26 de septiembre 2015  Queridos amigos:  En primer lugar, me gustaría dar las gracias a la Universidad de Columbia por invitarme a compartir algunas reflexiones sobre los desafíos que enfrentan las democracias. En el caso de Chile, es una oportunidad para reflexionar 25 años después del final de la dictadura, que proyectó una sombra sobre nuestra historia de libertad y democracia.  Como mencionó el Profesor Bollinger, hace tres años, esta Universidad me honró con un Doctorado Honoris Causa, otorgado en ese momento en el reconocimiento de mi liderazgo en temas de la Mujer en las Naciones Unidas. Ahora vuelvo como Presidenta de Chile, elegida por segunda vez, para compartir con ustedes algunas ideas sobre cuestiones que plantean desafíos urgentes de nuestros países. Y quiero hacerlo desde una perspectiva que no es académica, sino la de alguien que ha ejercido el gobierno, lo que la da una perspectiva diferente.   También quiero agradecer a Columbia por establecer uno de sus ocho centros globales en Chile y, por lo tanto, contribuir al debate sobre las políticas públicas, especialmente en cuanto al agua, las energías renovables y el envejecimiento de la población.  Y, por supuesto, quiero saludar a mis compatriotas que estudian en la Universidad, - a algunos de ellos que no son estudiantes, pero viven aquí en Nueva York-, muchos de los cuales son ayudados por el sistema público chileno de becas de estudio.  Creo que nuestra sociedad en Latino América ha tenido un montón de cambios. Y también todavía tenemos los desafíos de ser uno de los continentes con mayores desigualdades. Tenemos, por supuesto, grandes –yo diría- avances en cuanto a algo que hablé ayer en las Naciones Unidas, cuando acordamos nuevos objetivos de desarrollo, los 8 ODM para ahora y para los próximos 15 años, en que todavía tenemos que hacer frente a la pobreza, todavía tenemos que reducir la desigualdad, todavía tenemos que garantizar y contribuir a dignificar el trabajo, a buenos salarios, etc.   Todos los desafíos económicos y sociales que todavía tenemos en América Latina que mencioné significan que todavía es el más desigual de los continentes. Pero lo hemos hecho; en búsqueda de los ODM, el continente ha disminuido notablemente la mortalidad materna, la mortalidad infantil, etc.   Y para Chile, la desigualdad sigue siendo un tema muy importante que estamos trabajando en nuestro programa de gobierno. Estamos trabajando a través de una gran reforma fiscal que nos proporcionará dinero permanente para reformas muy importantes que estamos llevando a cabo, como la Reforma Educativa, para garantizar educación para todos, con calidad, también gratuita; para que no haya familias que puedan quedarse atrás porque no tienen los recursos.   Estamos trabajando en la mejora del Sistema de Salud, estamos trabajando en la mejora de la desigualdad de género, y estamos trabajando en tratar de poner fin a todas las desigualdades, en términos de desigualdades geográficas, las desigualdades indígenas: podemos abordarlas y enfrentarlas.  Pero hoy, no voy a hablar de eso.  Permítanme, en primer lugar hablar sobre el estado de la democracia, 25 años más tarde, porque hemos visto un nuevo fenómeno, pero yo creo que es importante para nosotros pensar en ello, entenderlo y ver donde hay algunas oportunidades.   En primer lugar, déjenme hacer hincapié en lo diferente que es el mundo de hoy respecto al de hace un cuarto de siglo atrás.  Mientras que a finales de la década de 1980 la mayoría de los países no habían elegido a sus gobiernos a través de procedimientos democráticos, hoy es todo lo contrario. Incluso con todas las dificultades que entraña, la democracia es ahora la regla y no la excepción.  Esta tendencia está particularmente marcada en América Latina. Hace cuarenta años, en 1975, sólo cuatro países tenían gobiernos democráticos y las dictaduras prevalecían, en una larga noche que duró hasta bien entrada la década de 1980.  Hoy en día, la gran mayoría de nuestras naciones tienen instituciones y gobiernos creados por la soberanía del pueblo. La democracia es nuestra realidad política.  Para aquellos que han crecido en sistemas democráticos maduros, probablemente no es fácil apreciar el impacto que esto produce. Pero para aquellos de nosotros que hemos sufrido la restricción de la vida y la libertad que una dictadura representa, el cambio que el continente ha experimentado es notable.  Para nosotros, los latinoamericanos, la capacidad de elegir a los que deberían conducir a nuestros países y tener un Congreso autónomo y un poder judicial independiente es un valor fundamental que defender. Ha habido demasiada tristeza en nuestra historia al no proteger lo que hemos sido capaces de recuperar.   Ahora nos encontramos con que esta imagen de la democracia generalizada - y ahora me refiero no sólo a nivel regional sino también a nivel mundial - se enfrenta a nuevos desafíos. Porque sabemos que ya no es suficiente elegir a los gobiernos en las elecciones formalmente competitivas, ni seleccionar a nuestros representantes y darles el poder de tomar decisiones en nuestro nombre.   Estos pre-requisitos esenciales pero insuficientes están compitiendo con otros más apremiantes. Algunos desafíos no son nuevos y se refieren a la calidad de la democracia, como la cuestión de la transparencia, la relación entre la política y el dinero y la distancia entre la élite y la sociedad.  Pero hay otros criterios que son de hecho nuevos y que se relacionan con el rol activo de los ciudadanos y la crisis de confianza  que afecta a las sociedades en todo el mundo.  Voy a tratar estos últimos elementos en mayor detalle.  Así que déjenme hablarles de la democracia representativa frente a las formas no convencionales de participación política.  ¿Qué se esconde detrás de estas nuevas cuestiones que afectan a la calidad de nuestra democracia?  Las concepciones clásicas de la democracia representativa – como aquellas desarrolladas por cientistas políticos, por ejemplo, Robert Dahl - han tenido que hacer frente a la erupción en la escena pública de grupos de ciudadanos que a menudo desafían las formas convencionales de acción política.  El mundo entero fue testigo del proceso conocido como la "Primavera Árabe", o lo que ha ocurrido en España y Grecia, por mencionar algunos ejemplos.  Una vez más, los hechos han puesto la teoría a prueba.  ¿Cuáles son las características de este fenómeno emergente? Y no voy a mencionarlas todas, voy a mencionar algunas de ellas.   Aunque esta nueva forma de ciudadanía política toma muy diversas formas, hay algunas características comunes, tales como, en primer lugar, la participación activa de una nueva clase media forjada en la democracia y en un período de mayor prosperidad económica y nuestra capacidad de influir en la agenda más allá de los períodos electorales.   En segundo lugar, las exigencias difieren de los clásicos, por ejemplo, por el movimiento de los trabajadores. Históricamente los trabajadores exigieron una mayor participación en la distribución de la riqueza social –esto es también algo que sigue siendo importante- pero los nuevos activistas políticos han construido una plataforma que más allá –si se me permite decirlo- una suerte de reivindicaciones de segundo nivel como la calidad de la política, la mejora de la educación o la calidad de vida en los centros urbanos.  En tercer lugar, este nuevo activismo social por lo general anula las estructuras o partidos políticos tradicionales. De hecho, estos a menudo se han pasado por alto en sus intentos de "llevarse la victoria" en la articulación de las demandas de estos movimientos. La crítica de los partidos, de sus dirigentes y de los gobiernos se ha convertido en una parte central de la agenda del discurso público, en particular en la demanda de una mayor integridad, el fin de las prácticas corruptas y la demanda por más participación.   Permítanme hablar un poco sobre la confianza en los líderes y las instituciones, y la cuestión de integridad y la necesidad de una nueva rendición de cuentas y mecanismos de transparencia.  Me detendré un momento sobre este último punto. Lo que ayer era considerado como "normal" puede ya no ser visto como tal. Y lo digo no sólo por la exigencia ética de construir un cortafuego contra la corrupción, sino también porque esta situación ha creado una crisis de confianza en la relación entre los ciudadanos, las instituciones y sus líderes.  Este punto afecta directamente a la gobernabilidad de nuestras democracias y el ejercicio cotidiano de las responsabilidades institucionales de los gobiernos. En una sociedad de la información donde la opinión pública es volátil, la legitimidad formal para gobernar y aplicar políticas públicas ya no es suficiente. Hoy en día lo que se necesita es un respaldo casi a diario por parte de los ciudadanos, expresado en las encuestas, en los medios y en las redes.  Y esta opinión no está dictada principalmente por criterios formales o de procedimiento, sino por las preferencias éticas y por el valor del dominio público. Los ciudadanos están exigiendo cada vez más transparencia, rendición de cuentas y poner fin a la dominación del dominio público por parte de intereses privados.  En otras palabras, los ciudadanos están exigiendo que sus líderes hagan el trabajo para el que fueron elegidos, que es ver realmente el interés general y defender el sentido común de un "nosotros" público contra los abusos y privilegios de las minorías poderosas.  La democracia chilena es estable y sus niveles de transparencia han sido tradicionalmente altos. Pero no somos inmunes a este fenómeno de creciente demanda. Y también hemos experimentado la presión que ponen en el ejercicio del Gobierno y en el trabajo de los partidos políticos.  Pero queremos una democracia más fuerte y más cívica. Vemos este fenómeno no como una amenaza sino como una oportunidad. Por esta razón, no hemos perdido el tiempo en apretones de manos o auto-crítica teórica, sino que hemos decidido hacer frente a los desafíos y empezar a movernos.  Hemos escuchado estas nuevas demandas de la sociedad y estamos respondiendo mediante la implementación de una amplia agenda pro-transparencia y lucha contra la corrupción, así como la mejora de la calidad de nuestra democracia.  Básicamente, estamos haciendo cambios en nuestro sistema político y en el funcionamiento de los partidos políticos, con especial atención en los procesos electorales.  Tenemos fe en que pronto habrá una regulación más estricta y la supervisión de la financiación electoral, poniendo fin a la relación incestuosa entre el negocio y la política; representantes involucrados en actos de corrupción perderán sus escaños; el uso de información privilegiada será castigado y habrá una mayor transparencia de las acciones de los que tienen responsabilidades en la administración pública, por mencionar algunos ejemplos en el sector público.  Otra cosa que ya hemos hecho es que cambiamos el sistema electoral; pasamos de uno binominal que había a uno más representativo y, por primera vez, por fin tenemos, aprobamos la cuota del 40% de candidatas como una obligación para todos los partidos.  Yo quiero un 40% de las electas, pero no se puede tenerlo todo. Pero aunque en mi experiencia se puede siempre, ustedes saben que se puede mirar siempre qué se está haciendo ya que realmente se puede encontrar la manera de no hacerlo.   Así que lo interesante es que esta ley ha incentivado a no violar la ley. Por lo tanto, cualquier partido político que no inscriba el 40% de candidatas, no podrá inscribir a ningún candidato en absoluto. Así que, es el 40%, o no tendrá nada. Y el segundo incentivo, porque ustedes pueden tener candidatas que nunca van a ser elegidas, por lo que, los partidos que puedan elegir a más mujeres, recibirán recompensas económicas, porque realmente queremos que esto sea una realidad.  También se tomarán medidas que afecten al sector privado, en particular en lo relativo a la corrupción privada y el liderazgo empresarial de las grandes empresas.   Hay mucho más, yo acabo de mencionar algunas cuestiones principales. Ésta es una agenda amplia y ambiciosa pero que no puede posponerse: hoy nuestros ciudadanos ya no van a tolerar la continuación de las malas prácticas que resultan sólo en la distorsión de sus deseos y entregan un duro golpe a la democracia.  Así que, como siempre, la pregunta desde el punto de vista del Gobierno es ¿qué se debe hacer?   Y esta pregunta hoy implica un nuevo desafío, debido a que el nuevo activismo ciudadano conlleva un límite al poder que los gobiernos y los partidos siempre han poseído. Esto significa que éstos, además de mejorar sus instrumentos formales, deben encontrar un nuevo espacio para la acción, en particular a través de lo que se ha llamado "el poder blando", como la cooperación, la educación cívica y la creación de redes.  Incluso con este nuevo campo de acción, el camino no será fácil. Tenemos que superar la inercia, erradicar las prácticas arraigadas y combatir el miedo al cambio que a menudo se siente en nuestras sociedades después de siglos de experimentos traumáticos.  Y no es fácil poner fin a décadas e incluso siglos de confusión entre lo que es público y lo privado y de las prácticas arraigadas por el que el dominio público es rehén de los grupos corporativos.   Pero es esencial que nos hagamos cargo y actuemos. No sólo porque no hay tiempo que perder, sino también porque, si vamos a recuperar la confianza de los ciudadanos, debemos actuar con convicción, aunque no pueda haber resultados inmediatos.  Porque el mayor bien público y el más frágil, que ha sido amenazado por las malas prácticas en el Estado, la política y los negocios, es la confianza pública.    La falta de confianza en el sistema político y estos tipos no convencionales de acción política de los ciudadanos plantean al menos dos peligros. El primero es el absentismo, cuando la mayoría de los ciudadanos ya no confían en el poder de su voto. El segundo es el populismo, cuando el discurso incendiario y las soluciones de "parche curita" reemplazan el sentido de la responsabilidad y la institucionalización que todo gobierno, sea cual sea su ideología, debe tener.   De manera que creemos que es posible mitigar ambos peligros. Pero esto requiere de coraje e innovación. Coraje para renunciar a parte del poder que la clase política siempre ha considerado como su derecho de nacimiento; e innovación para imaginar mecanismos y prácticas que abracen el activismo cívico y restauren la confianza en las instituciones democráticas.   El objetivo no es cambiar la inercia de las instituciones por las movilizaciones públicas, sino inyectar vitalidad cívica en las instituciones democráticas.   Sin ir más lejos, ya existen las prácticas de la arena internacional y las normas sobre consultas con los grupos de interés especial. Un ejemplo es el mecanismo consagrado en el Convenio Nº 169 de la Organización Internacional del Trabajo, en relación al impacto de las políticas y proyectos en las áreas de influencia indígena; otro son los procedimientos para tomar en cuenta las opiniones de los ciudadanos afectados en la evaluación de impacto ambiental de las iniciativas de inversión, actualmente en vigor en varios países.  Algunos países desarrollados tienen una tradición de Libros Verdes, que - como ustedes saben - son borradores de política pública presentados para comentarios del público, utilizando los métodos proporcionados por la tecnología. En Chile, se ha utilizado con frecuencia este mecanismo, -y esto es confirmado por los hechos- ya que estamos convencidos que una política será mejor y más aceptable para los ciudadanos –quiero decir, de otra forma que lo haga más legítimo- cuando los ciudadanos sientan que están siendo parte de su formulación.   De forma que tenemos que ser atrevidos e innovadores. En un mundo que cambia rápidamente, donde los ciudadanos están alterando radicalmente sus tipos de acción, el peligro para la gobernabilidad no radica en el cambio, sino en no hacer nada.  Estoy convencida de que sólo mediante la innovación sobre las disposiciones para la inclusión y la participación de los ciudadanos, vamos a ser capaces de hablar de la re-legitimación de las instituciones democráticas. En otras palabras, parafraseando a Willy Brandt, para abordar los problemas de la democracia, necesitamos más democracia.  En el ámbito académico, ustedes tienen el espacio para explorar formas de identificar estas formas de participación ciudadana, con el fin de restaurar la confianza en el sistema político. Los invito a pensar en América Latina, los invito a pensar en Chile. Estamos dispuestos a escuchar y aprender.  Queridos amigos:  Hemos experimentado un cuarto de siglo de revitalización democrática. Hoy en día, más personas en más países están eligiendo a sus líderes en elecciones competitivas y nosotros la valoramos.   Sin embargo, como decía, hay nuevos desafíos a la calidad de nuestra democracia, sobre todo porque los ciudadanos están exigiendo la participación y al Gobierno, transparencia. Si tuviera que proponer una fórmula simple, yo diría que el círculo virtuoso en el que la salud de la democracia depende es una mejor representación, la mejor participación efectiva y, por supuesto, muy altos estándares de probidad.  La Universidad de Columbia es un centro académico de alcance global. Aquí el mundo es visto en su diversidad más amplia de una vasta gama de disciplinas. Con su condición de universidad global, Columbia puede hacer una gran contribución al debate sobre la forma en que estos componentes fundamentales de la democracia pueden interactuar y complementarse.  Un ilustre ex alumno de esta Universidad, dijo hace casi ocho décadas: "Los últimos gobernantes de nuestra democracia no son un presidente y senadores, congresistas y funcionarios del gobierno, sino los votantes de este país". Hoy FDR - Franklin Delano Roosevelt- probablemente diría que los verdaderos gobernantes de una democracia son los ciudadanos.  Muchas gracias.