SPEECH BY H.E. MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, REPUBLIC OF CHILE’S PRESIDENT FOR BREAKFAST ON “PROGRESS IN WOMEN’S RIGHTS AND OTHER GENDER ISSUES”  New York, September 26TH, 2015  Ladies and gentlemen:  It is an honour to be part of this dialogue with so important people and so good friends – as I see around the table –. I think it’s a chance to discuss on progress in the struggle for gender equality. And I know that we all have here common values and share a long-standing commitment in this regard.  For both Prime Minister Erna Solberg and me, promoting progress towards building a more equitable and just world that guarantees the rights of women and girls is more than a challenge; and as we were talking some minutes ago: it is a necessity and an obligation. And I know also that the President of Liberia, Ellen, and Dr. Zuma, they’ve have been working on there on duties and responsibilities on making concrete progress on women’s rights and women’s issues.   We are aware that now is a particular and historic moment, not only because we have just had yesterday adapted the new strategies where we have specific objective. And we’re very happy about that because there’s always on temptation on saying that they have to be sort of a transversal issue and not being like specific objectives. And we all know that when it disappears like a specific objective it disappears from the priorities of governments and people’s making decisions. So I think we’re in a good moment; it’s a year of transition, but also year of fresh possibilities for making progress on all our unfinished business.   As you mentioned, we’re celebrating this year landmark women’s rights events that took place in recent decades. Of course, the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the World Summit for Social Development and the fifteenth anniversary of the Millennium Summit and Security Council resolution 1325 on women, peace and security.  And I think it’s very interesting, because in commemoration of fifteenth anniversary of Resolution 1325, the United Nations will carry out a global study to assess its implementation. I think it will be very important for steps forward, and I think is an excellent opportunity for us to reflect on the challenges before us as well as on lessons learned.  But the twentieth anniversary of Beijing has also been on the international agenda this year, with commemorative events being held in various places, including my country.  So Beijing charted a course and provided an institutional framework for consolidating progress towards the attainment of gender equality and the protection of women’s and girls’ rights. But now we have the duty to continue along that path towards the creation of greater opportunities for all women and men and also to define the goals we will pursue –I mean every one of us in our specific realities- over the next 15 to 20 years.  And I’m sure that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a very important opportunity to speed up our efforts in this direction. The goal 5 aims to “achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls”, setting specific targets for combating discrimination and violence against women and girls, valuing unpaid domestic work -but also I would say promoting much more pay for work- and promoting the effective participation of women in leadership positions.  We have to make – I would say- a determined effort to implement all these goals but particularly all the sustainable development goals. And in that sense I do believe that empowering women, protecting women and ensuring women’s rights are excellent objectives by itself, but also through these, it will be possible to achieve the rest of the goals. We do know the important role that women play in terms of fighting hunger, in terms in ensuring peace and security, so we believe that the objective 5 is essential to achieve all the rest of the objectives.   In that regard, my government is working to define follow-up in mechanisms for the new 2030 Agenda. For example, we were the first country in Latin-American that we developed a Plan of Action of the Resolution 1325, and this year, we’re already launched the Second Nacional Plan, adjusting us to the new realities. In two ways, on one hand, preparing more Chilean women to be able, not only on the military but also on civilian, to play an important roles on peacekeeping operations in the future, but also working on the issues leading to violence on women. And, also giving the prospective that women can have an important role on campaigns at the peacekeeping places because they’re a very good supporters of peace.   We want to –and it’s very important- to promote new commitments and actions in every sphere of society, so we ensure that women will not continue to be left behind. And as I said, I think the gender equality benefits us all.  And in that sense, the message is clear: we cannot continue to tolerate gender gaps. It is not acceptable, for example, that in 83 of the countries assessed by the United Nations, women earn between 10 and 30 per cent less than men.  And this is not only in Latin-American, Africa or Asian countries, even in Europe where we have sometimes those kinds of figures.   Or for example, violence against women. Violence against women is not only and undeveloped countries, we do have violence against women all over the world. So, there’re a lot of barriers and we need to continue working on culture barriers. But mainly, we have to work also to remove barriers to women’s participation in the labour market and fight for equal pay. This is something that again it’s not only on one part of the world; it’s also all over the world.   In this regard, Madame Prime Minister, I have to say that Norway has always been an example of positive and successful measures that we can learn from, such as quotas for increasing and ensuring women’s participation in the boards of public enterprises. We have put as target, when I’ll finish my government, that less 40 per cent of all board of public companies should be female. And of course with that example, we’re pushing in the private sector to follow that example. When I started in the government, I think we had like 8.4, and this year we have already 23.7 per cent of women on board. So we´re continuing improving.   Of course, it isn’t under any discussion that we ensure equal access to education and health for girls. The fact that the life expectancy of women in high-income countries exceeds that of women in low-income countries by 19 years is a call to action with a renewed sense of urgency.  Because women and girls cannot continue to suffer such discrimination.  As for gender violence, we face enormous challenges. Because we must move beyond the limited idea that violence only takes place in the home towards an integrated understanding of all types of violence against women and girls. Because this kind of situation unfortunately occur daily and have various manifestations, in both public and private spaces.  So we need to guarantee and generate the conditions for providing women greater opportunities to be in leadership and decision-making positions.  And we have been a faithful advocate on this regard, but not only an advocate because we need no word, we need actions.   So we’ve also changed directly through laws and at the beginning of this year -and from now on for the first time, and after many year of struggles- in Chile the parties should inscribe 40 per cent of the candidates has to be female. But because we know that it may be no easy for women, we have incentives –If I may say- parties who want fill that requirement or who not to be available to register, non-candidates. So they have to go with 40% of female candidates. But in the other hand, we know that many times they put women where they’ll never be able to elected. So we have these positive incentives: parties, who elect more women, they’ll have economic rewards. So we’re trying to find all the ways to break all the obstacles for women’s political participation.   And of course, we’re working very strongly on one of the most important issue, which how we change the culture so women are not seems a citizen of second class. And in that sense, we thought that symbolic issue is important, that’s why I think is so important to have more women in Parliament, in office, on boards and CEO because that means and shows that women have capacities and that’s a good example for many other women and girls.   But it’s so important to open up spaces for dialogue and cooperation towards visions for supporting and facilitating efforts to address these global challenges with regard to women’s rights. And talking about women’s rights, here it’s my friend Babatunde Osotimehin, and of course we support in all the world he has done in terms of ensuring women’s sexual reproductive rights and have access to all the necessary. Thanks those kinds of plans, they’re alive.   I believe that we’ll never be able to overcome the obstacles that permeate our societies if we do not adopt mechanisms for coordinating national and regional efforts.  In that sense, international cooperation for development must be our tool for achieving fuller and more rapid progress towards closing existing gaps in each of our continents. And this includes working hard to guarantee the rights of women by promoting efforts to bring about their active and broad participation in all spheres of society. I would say today we are charged with the task of encouraging and promoting good experiences, experiences that could be exchange in many different countries on governments, on companies, and NGO, on political organizations.   I hope that this working breakfast will lead us to assume these responsibilities, and to make proposals and suggest new formulas for confronting challenges, today and in the years to come. And of course, you can always count on me.    Thank you.  ******  DISCURSO DE S.E. MICHELLE BACHELET JERIA, PRESIDENTA DE LA REPÚBLICA DE CHILE, EN EL DESAYUNO SOBRE "AVANCES EN LOS DERECHOS DE LA MUJER Y OTRAS CUESTIONES DE GÉNERO" (Traducción)  Nueva York, 26 de septiembre de 2015   Damas y caballeros:  Es un honor ser parte de este diálogo con gente tan importante y tan buenos amigos –como veo alrededor de esta mesa-. Creo que es una oportunidad para que discutamos los avances en la lucha por la igualdad de género. Y sé que todos tenemos aquí valores comunes y compartimos un compromiso de larga data en este sentido.   Tanto para la primera ministra Erna Solberg como para mí, fomentar los avances hacia la construcción de un mundo más equitativo y justo que garantice los derechos de las mujeres y las niñas es más que un desafío; y como estuvimos conversando hace unos minutos: es una necesidad y una obligación. Y también sé que la Presidenta de Liberia, Ellen, y la Dra. Zuma han estado trabajando en los deberes y responsabilidades para concretar avances en los derechos y temas de las mujeres.   Somos conscientes de que ahora es un momento particular e histórico, no sólo porque recién ayer hemos adoptado nuevas estrategias, donde tenemos objetivos específicos. Y estamos muy contentos porque siempre existe la tentación de decir que son una suerte de temas transversales, y no objetivos específicos. Y todos sabemos que cuando desaparece como objetivo específico, desaparece de las prioridades de los gobiernos y de la toma de decisiones de la gente. Así que creo que estamos en un buen momento; es un año de transición, un año de nuevas posibilidades para avanzar en todos nuestros asuntos pendientes.  Como ustedes mencionaban, este año, estamos celebrando históricos eventos sobre los derechos de las mujeres que tuvieron lugar en las últimas décadas. Desde luego, la Declaración de Beijing y la Plataforma de Acción, la Cumbre Mundial sobre Desarrollo Social y el decimoquinto aniversario de la Resolución 1325 del Consejo de Seguridad y la Cumbre del Milenio sobre la mujer, la paz y la seguridad.  Y creo que es muy interesante, porque en conmemoración del decimoquinto aniversario de la Resolución 1325, las Naciones Unidas llevarán a cabo un estudio global para evaluar su implementación. Y creo que va a ser muy importante para los pasos que siguen y una excelente oportunidad para que reflexionemos sobre los desafíos que se nos presentan, así como las lecciones aprendidas.  Sin embargo, el vigésimo aniversario de Beijing también ha estado en la agenda internacional de este año, con actos conmemorativos que se celebran en varios lugares, entre ellos mi país.  De esta forma, Pekín trazó un curso y proporcionó un marco institucional para consolidar los avances hacia el logro de la igualdad de género y la protección de los derechos de mujeres y niñas. Sin embargo, ahora tenemos el deber de continuar por ese camino hacia la creación de mayores oportunidades para todas las mujeres y los hombres, y definir los objetivos que perseguiremos –me refiero a cada uno de nosotros en nuestras realidades-  en los próximos 15 a 20 años.  Y estoy segura que la Agenda para el Desarrollo Sostenible 2030 es una muy importante oportunidad para acelerar nuestros esfuerzos en esta dirección. El objetivo 5 tiene como meta "lograr la igualdad de género y el empoderamiento de las mujeres y las niñas", el establecimiento de objetivos específicos para la lucha contra la discriminación y la violencia contra las mujeres y las niñas, la valoración del trabajo doméstico no remunerado –pero yo diría promoviendo mayor paga por el trabajo- y la promoción de la participación efectiva de las mujeres en posiciones de liderazgo.  Tenemos que –yo diría- hacer un esfuerzo decidido para poner en práctica estos objetivos, pero en particular todos los objetivos de desarrollo sostenible. Y en ese sentido, creo de verdad que empoderar a las mujeres, protegerlas y asegurar sus  derechos son excelentes objetivos por sí solos, pero también a través de éstos, será posible alcanzar el resto de las metas. De verdad, conozco el importante rol que las mujeres juegan en términos de la lucha contra el hambre, en términos de asegurar la paz y seguridad, por lo que creemos que el objetivo 5 es esencial para lograr el resto de todos los objetivos.   En este sentido, mi Gobierno está trabajando para definir los mecanismos de seguimiento para la nueva Agenda 2030. Por ejemplo, fuimos el primer país de Latinoamérica que desarrolló un Plan de Acción para la Resolución 1325, y este año, ya hemos lanzando un Segundo Plan Nacional, ajustándonos a las nuevas realidades. En dos formas, por un lado, preparando a más mujeres chilenas para que puedan, no sólo desde un punto de vista militar sino también civil, jugar importantes roles en las operaciones de paz en el futuro, sino también trabajando en temas relativos a la violencia contra la mujer. Y también proporcionando la perspectiva de que las mujeres pueden tener un importante rol en campañas en puestos de operaciones de paz porque ellas son muy buenas partidarias de la paz.   Queremos –y es muy importante- promover nuevos compromisos y acciones en todos los ámbitos de la sociedad, de manera que nos aseguremos de que las mujeres no sigan quedándose atrás. Y como ya dije, la equidad de género nos beneficia a todos.  Y en ese sentido, el mensaje es claro: no podemos seguir tolerando las diferencias de género. No es aceptable, por ejemplo, que en 83 de los países evaluados por las Naciones Unidas, las mujeres ganan entre 10% y 30% menos que los hombres. Y esto no ocurre sólo en Latinoamérica, en África o los países asiáticos incluso en Europa, donde tenemos a veces este tipo de cifras.    O por ejemplo, la violencia contra la mujer. La violencia contra la mujer no ocurre sólo en los países no desarrollados, tenemos violencia contra la mujer en todo el mundo. De manera que existen una serie de barreras, y necesitamos continuar trabajando en las barreras culturales. Pero principalmente, también tenemos que trabajar en eliminar las barreras que impiden la participación de la mujer y luchar por salarios iguales. Esto es algo que de nuevo no ocurre en una parte del mundo, sino en todas partes.   En este sentido, Señora Primera Ministra, tengo que decir que Noruega siempre ha sido un ejemplo de medidas positivas y exitosas de las que podemos aprender, como las cuotas para aumentar y asegurar la participación de las mujeres en los consejos de administración de las empresas públicas. Nosotros nos hemos puesto como objetivo que al término de mi Gobierno, al menos el 40% de los directorios de todas las empresas públicas tengan mujeres. Y desde luego que con ese ejemplo, vamos a empujar al sector privado a seguir ese ejemplo. Creo que teníamos alrededor de un 8.4%, y este año ya tenemos 23.7% de mujeres en los directorios. Así que vamos a continuar con estas mejoras.   Desde luego que no está en discusión que aseguremos la igualdad de acceso a la educación y salud de las niñas. El hecho de que la esperanza de vida de las mujeres en los países de altos ingresos sea superior al de mujeres en los países de bajos ingresos por 19 años es un llamado a la acción con un renovado sentido de urgencia. Porque las mujeres y las niñas no pueden seguir sufriendo este tipo de discriminación.  En cuanto a la violencia de género, nos enfrentamos a enormes desafíos. Porque debemos ir más allá de la idea limitada de que la violencia sólo se lleva a cabo en el hogar, ir hacia una comprensión integrada de todos los tipos de violencia contra las mujeres y las niñas. Porque este tipo de situaciones ocurren todos los días y tienen diversas manifestaciones, tanto en espacios públicos como privados.  De manera que tenemos que garantizar y generar las condiciones para proporcionar a las mujeres mayores oportunidades para estar en posiciones de liderazgo y toma de decisiones. Y hemos sido un defensor fiel en este sentido, pero no sólo un defensor, porque no necesitamos palabras, necesitamos acciones.   De esta forma, hemos hecho cambios por medio de la ley, y a principios de este año –y a partir de ahora,  por primera vez y después de muchos años de lucha - en Chile los partidos deberán inscribir un 40% de candidatas mujeres. Pero como sabemos que puede no ser fácil para las mujeres, tenemos incentivos –si puedo decirlo así- para los partidos que quieran llenar ese requisito o los que no estén disponibles para registrarse, no tendrán candidatos. Así que tienen que ir con un 40% de candidatas. Pero por otro lado, sabemos que muchas veces ponen a las mujeres donde nunca podrían ser electas. Así, tenemos estos incentivos positivos: los partidos que elijan más mujeres, tendrán recompensas económicas. De esta forma, estamos tratando de encontrar todas las maneras de romper todos los obstáculos para la participación política de las mujeres.  Y, por supuesto, estamos trabajando muy fuertemente en una de las cuestiones más importantes, que es cómo cambiamos la cultura para que las mujeres no parezcan ciudadanas de segunda clase. Y en ese sentido, el tema simbólico es importante, y es la razón por la que creo que es tan importante tener más mujeres en el Parlamento, en cargos, en directorios y como directoras ejecutivas, porque significa y demuestra que las mujeres tienen capacidades y eso es un buen ejemplo para otras mujeres y niñas.   Pero es muy importante abrir espacios para el diálogo y la cooperación hacia visiones para apoyar y facilitar los esfuerzos para hacer frente a estos desafíos globales en materia de derechos de las mujeres. Y hablando de los derechos de las mujeres, aquí está mi amigo Babatunde Osotimehin, y por supuesto que apoyamos en todo el mundo lo que él ha hecho en términos de asegurar los derechos reproductivos sexuales de las mujeres y el acceso a todo lo necesario. Gracias a ese tipo de planes, ellas están vivas.  Creo que nunca seremos capaces de superar los obstáculos que impregnan nuestras sociedades si no adoptamos mecanismos de coordinación de los esfuerzos nacionales y regionales.  En ese sentido, la cooperación internacional para el desarrollo debe ser nuestra herramienta para lograr avances más rápidos y plenos hacia el cierre de las brechas existentes en cada uno de nuestros continentes. Y esto incluye trabajar duro para garantizar los derechos de las mujeres mediante la promoción de esfuerzos para lograr su participación activa y amplia en todas las esferas de la sociedad.  Yo diría que hoy estamos encargados de la tarea de fomentar y promover buenas experiencias, experiencias que podrían ser de intercambio en muchos países diferentes, a nivel de gobiernos, empresas y organizaciones no gubernamentales, y organizaciones políticas.  Espero que este desayuno de trabajo nos lleve a asumir estas responsabilidades, hacer propuestas y sugerir nuevas fórmulas para hacer frente a los desafíos, hoy y en los años venideros. Y, por supuesto, siempre pueden contar conmigo.  Muchas gracias.