(Original Speech)   Dear Friends:   It is with great pride and emotion that I join you today to inaugurate this mural, “Todas las Manos” - All Hands - created by Francisco Letelier.   As the result of the collaboration among students and the support of Chilean and American friends, this work of art asserts and honors the outstanding human qualities of Orlando Letelier, Ronnie Moffit, and Rodrigo Rojas.   Orlando, Ronnie and Rodrigo are alive in this mural. They live in hope, with the illusion of a better future, in this space of beauty, culture and education that was made possible by love and art.   They are alive because of the love of so many of those who knew them, of so many that shared their kind words, and so many more that carry them in their hearts, even if they never met them personally.   “Your voice will carry on living”, goes a beautiful song written to honor Rodrigo Rojas. Indeed, their voices will continue to live and are very much alive today, both in Chile and in the United States.   Art shows us today that it can rise from tragedy and pain. Art can highlight the purpose that guided Orlando, Ronnie and Rodrigo’s life. It can restore their hope, their solidarity and their search for freedom.   80 years ago, when Pablo Neruda received the news of the murder of his friend Federico García Lorca, he wrote:   “What are the verses for, if not for this night   in which a bitter dagger finds us out, for this day,  for this twilight, for this broken corner  where the beaten heart of man prepares to die?”   The same bitter dagger stabbed Chile precisely in September. The same bitter dagger stabbed those who raised their voices demanding justice.   Inside and outside our mountainous country –and Francisco paints our mountains in his mural–, there was an attempt to silence a voice that can’t be silenced. And it can’t be silenced because it is the voice of men and women who demand a better life, a world where everyone is respected and justice prevails.   In those days of persecution, art was an essential force for the movements that sought to restore democracy. It was a way to add more voices, to rescue hope.   And today art, the creation Francisco offers, allows us to preserve our collective memory, and to pay homage to our heroes for peace: the heroes that helped consolidate our democracy, and that help strengthen our absolute respect for human rights, each and every day.   Chile has now a Museum of Memory and Human Rights, where the history of our homeland is in constant dialogue with contemporary art. It is also a space where new generations can learn about this painful past and learn the lessons that history and art can bring us.   These lessons do not belong only to Chile, but are universal.   Because the values for which Orlando Letelier, Ronnie Moffit and Rodrigo Rojas fought for are the principles of respect for human beings, of freedom and dialogue, that must prevail worldwide.   They are the essential principles of international relations, those that Orlando defended when fulfilling his many political responsibilities and that we must protect today with all our energy, to prevent mistreatment of hundreds of millions of people around the world.   Dear Friends:   What Orlando Letelier said during the presentation of his credentials as Chilean Ambassador to the United States more than 45 years ago, still stands. The challenge for many nations around the world is “to include greater sectors of their people in the responsibilities of government, and in the benefits of development, technology and civilization”.   I would like to thank and congratulate Francisco Letelier for this work of art, as well as the team that participated in it. Thanks to American University for embracing and sharing this mural, and to the many people that contributed in this project.   Memory and honor of all the three is something marvelous.     Thank you very much.   (Traducción)   Queridos amigos:   Es con gran orgullo y emoción que me uno a ustedes hoy para inaugurar este mural, "Todas las Manos" – “All Hands” - creado por Francisco Letelier.   Como resultado de la colaboración entre los estudiantes y el apoyo de amigos chilenos y estadounidenses, esta obra de arte asevera y hace honor a las excepcionales cualidades humanas de Orlando Letelier, Ronnie Moffit, y Rodrigo Rojas.   Orlando, Ronnie y Rodrigo están vivos en este mural. Ellos viven en la esperanza, con la ilusión de un futuro mejor, en este espacio de belleza, cultura y educación que fue posible por el amor y el arte.   Están vivos por el amor de muchos de los que los conocían, de tantos que compartieron sus amables palabras, y así muchos más que los llevan en sus corazones, incluso si nunca se encontraron con ellos personalmente.   "Tu voz seguirá viviendo", dice una hermosa canción escrita en honor a Rodrigo Rojas. De hecho, sus voces seguirán viviendo y están mucho más vivas hoy en día, tanto en Chile como en Estados Unidos.   El arte nos muestra hoy que puede levantarse de la tragedia y el dolor. El arte puede destacar el propósito que guió la vida de Orlando, Ronnie y Rodrigo. Puede restaurar su esperanza, su solidaridad y su búsqueda de la libertad.   Hace 80 años, cuando Pablo Neruda recibió la noticia de la muerte de su amigo Federico García Lorca, escribió:   “Para qué sirven los versos si no es para esa noche  en que un puñal amargo nos averigua, para ese día, para ese crepúsculo, para ese rincón roto donde el golpeado corazón del hombre se dispone a morir?”    La misma amarga daga apuñaló a Chile, precisamente, en septiembre. La misma amarga daga apuñaló a los que levantaron su voz para exigir justicia.   Dentro y fuera de nuestro montañoso país -y Francisco pinta nuestras montañas en su mural-, hubo un intento de silenciar una voz que no puede ser silenciada. Y no puede ser silenciada porque es la voz de los hombres y las mujeres que exigen una vida mejor, un mundo donde todos sean respetados y la justicia prevalezca.   En esos días de persecución, el arte era una fuerza esencial para los movimientos que buscaban restaurar la democracia. Era una manera de agregar más voces, de rescatar la esperanza.   Y hoy en día el arte, la creación que Francisco ofrece, nos permite conservar nuestra memoria colectiva, y rendir homenaje a nuestros héroes de la paz: los héroes que ayudaron a consolidar nuestra democracia, y que ayudan a fortalecer nuestro absoluto respeto por los derechos humanos, todos los días.     Chile tiene ahora un Museo de la Memoria y los Derechos Humanos, donde la historia de nuestra patria está en constante diálogo con el arte contemporáneo. También es un espacio donde las nuevas generaciones pueden aprender acerca de este doloroso pasado y aprender las lecciones que la historia y el arte nos pueden aportar.   Estas lecciones no pertenecen sólo a Chile, sino que son universales.   Porque los valores por los que Orlando Letelier, Ronnie Moffit y Rodrigo Rojas lucharon, son los principios de respeto a los seres humanos, de la libertad y el diálogo, que deben prevalecer en todo el mundo.   Son los principios esenciales de las relaciones internacionales, los que Orlando defendió cuando cumplía con sus muchas responsabilidades políticas, y que debemos proteger hoy con toda nuestra energía, para evitar el maltrato de los cientos de millones de personas en todo el mundo.   Queridos amigos:   Lo que dijo Orlando Letelier durante la presentación de sus credenciales como Embajador de Chile en Estados Unidos hace más de 45 años, sigue en pie. El desafío para muchos países de todo el mundo está "en incluir mayores sectores de su población en las responsabilidades de gobierno, y en los beneficios del desarrollo, la tecnología y la civilización".   Me gustaría agradecer y felicitar a Francisco Letelier para esta obra de arte, así como al equipo que participó en ella. Gracias a la American University por acoger y compartir este mural, y a muchas personas que contribuyeron en este proyecto.   El recuerdo y el honor de los tres es algo maravilloso.   Muchas gracias.