(Original Answers)    Question 1: About Chile’s experience in Pacific Alliance   President Bachelet: The first that I would like to say is that I think these three countries we do believe in trade, and it has been very beneficial for all of us.   The Alliance is founded in common values of democracy, human rights, free trade, open economy, and we have enabled to advance a lot.   We know that the world is complicated right now, it’s complex in the economy, there’s a lot of uncertainties, I think it’s always the economy is very volatile. Many of us have been affected by commodities prices, but having said that we do believe that we have fantastic possibilities on increasing intraregional trade, intraregional activities, and of course, the four countries together, we are working on free flow of goods, of people, of trade.   We have been also making an important an interesting approach to other integration schemes, like for example, MERCOSUR, we don’t intend to merge MERCOSUR with the Pacific Alliance, but we’re looking add what we’ve called “Convergence in Diversity”, so what we can do to improve the whole region situation.   But we’re also looking other regions, for example, on this Saturday, we will be signing an Agreement with ASEAN that will permit to get there and from the four countries, three of us are members from APEC, so last year we had a very interesting meeting in Philippines -and President Santos was invited there too- to talk to the APEC countries and they were very interested.   And I think what is most interesting and I think something Susan already mentioned, is that we are four countries that we have some values in common but of course we have some different ideas too. But this is very, if I may say, concrete, pragmatic and flexible scheme of integration.   Question 2: About Difficulties to Free Trade Agreements with US and Europe    Well, in some countries as mine it happen, in the past, for example, when in Costa Rica, they were trying to advance on trade and free trade agreements, and it was that people linked politically to the kind of government we had. So it was we sent our people there, like senators or people from the house that could explain to those people who again say why three trade agreements can be very positive.   And of course, everything in the world today is interconnected, so you can have some issues that can affect your economy, but on the other hand, I mean to be honest, before we signed a free trade agreement with China, we had already a problem with competing with China because the prices were not very competitive with the Chilean prices in some areas.   So we cannot blame free agreements for some issues, they’re different explanations.   But I know that the four countries we do believe in trade, and it has been very positive, and what I think is important is that you can have some of mixes of different free agreements because different countries you can have some areas where you can compete, and some areas that you can cooperate. If you have many of them, you can diminish the weaknesses of some of them and improve the whole bunch of capacities. And that’s why we’re trying to do among us.       Question 3: About the goals of Pacific Alliance with Chile as President Pro Tempore until the next year    President Bachelet: Well, we had to find firstly which the priorities would be. Our priorities are education, innovation, science and technology; it is also a strengthening and internationalization of SME and trade facilitation.   But you know we just came into force, entered to force the protocol, it’s an additional protocol of the Pacific Alliance and that will give us more opportunities and possibilities to increase our intraregional trade and investment.   We also want to stablish a Cooperation Agenda with these 49 Observer Members States, with a specific project and of course also development initiatives.    We also have two countries in the region that already asked to be members, full members, and they are Costa Rica and Panama. Costa Rica is a little more official and Panama they are looking for, but they are still in some internal discussion.   And also we want to strengthen the convergence with other integration schemes, like I mentioned ASEAN and I hope APEC too.   Three of us have signed TPP and we hope that after the election, we would like that President Obama will push so TPP would be a reality because even though it is interesting what the minister of Economy has mentioned, one of the requirement of the TPP is that it can be entered into force when the 80% of the GDP of the countries is represented. So if US is not there, unfortunately it may not be able to function.   For Chile, you know we said it is a difficult choice in terms of we already had FTA with all the countries, but this is giving us better chances.   Question 4: About what additional advantages offers TPP to Chile    President Bachelet: On one hand, we all are also asking ourselves high standards in many areas and the other hand that some countries did, I mean, we negotiate better now with some countries, for example, Japan and others. It´s beneficial. Yes, it will be going better on.     Question 5: About Globalization and citizens’ crisis of trust     President Bachelet: I just wanna put gender perspective, I think the world needs more female presidents, but just something that I think we need think about it because it is not only when you see what happens in the UK with Brexit, and when you see which other people who are supporting one and other, you see that the globalization hasn’t reach, hasn’t be beneficial for everyone.   There are a lot of people where economic growth has not come into the benefits and so they feel frustrated and people are discontent, they don’t trust political institutions, they don’t trust business society.   And I think we need to tackle it, to care about it, we need to face and I think that it takes with discussion, as President Obama said yesterday, also talk about this.   So we need to continue doing great things that have been done in the world, the good thing is globalization broadens the world, the economy growth broadens to the world, but on the other hand we have to understand this has been very uneven and it can’t continue in that way.    So we need to also take measures so people feel that globalization or TPP is not something that it is beneficial for some small groups of people, but everyone is getting benefits of that.   So what I am telling it is just not said by sociologists, it’s what I’ve perceived in my country, what I’ve perceived everywhere, in Europe everywhere.   So I am mentioning as politician in this sense, even though when Pedro Pablo mentioned that he was going not a Politian, I remind the day I left office in my first term, and there was a huge group of men and women, all women were crying because I was leaving and then they said “Madame President, we are going to make you a recommendation, please don’t get involved in politics” and then in more four years I turned as President of Republic.   So I think we need to think a little bit more how we do better.                    Question 6: About political and social situation in Venezuela    President Bachelet: Well, we have been doing, I mean, inside UNASUR, we have created missions, special missions from our Ministries of Foreign Affairs, and we have been trying, when I just came into office decide we, that same day of my inauguration, there was a meeting of all ministers of UNASUR and afterwards a mission one there, so we had first resolved -that was for 2014- that the first time the position and the governments could sit together, try to dialogue and find solutions. But the thing is that it hasn’t been easy, you have to the will, the political will to go into the negations and to be able to give something each part, and it hasn’t been easy, we’re continuing doing efforts.   We’re really concerned because, on one hand, of the humanitarian side, you know that there´s a lack of products, medicine and so on, but  again is it takes two to tango, I mean, we cannot always have good results if the parties don’t want to go into that direction.   We will continue doing efforts because we´re concerned that something can get out of control. People they are hungry, they are having problems can be more violent situation, so we will continue doing as much is possible. But it’s no easy I have to say.     (Traducción)     Pregunta 1: Acerca de la experiencia de Chile en la Alianza del Pacífico   Presidenta Bachelet: Lo primero que me gustaría decir es que creo que los tres países creemos de verdad que el comercio ha sido muy beneficioso para todos nosotros.   La Alianza está fundada sobre valores comunes de la democracia, derechos humanos, el libre comercio, la economía abierta y hemos logrado avanzar mucho.   Sabemos que el mundo está complicado en la actualidad, el escenario económico es complejo, hay mucha incertidumbre, y creo que la economía está muy volátil. Muchos de nosotros hemos sufrido por el precio de los commodities, pero diciendo esto, creemos de verdad que tenemos fantásticas posibilidades de incrementar el comercio intrarregional, las actividades intrarregionales, y desde luego, los cuatro países juntos estamos trabajando en el flujo libre de bienes, personas y de comercio.   También hemos estado realizando un importante e interesante enfoque a otros esquemas de integración, como por ejemplo, el MERCOSUR, no intentamos fundir el MERCOSUR con la Alianza del Pacífico, sino que estamos buscando agregar lo que hemos llamado “Convergencia en la Diversidad”, de manera de qué poder hacer para mejorar la situación global de la región.   Pero también estamos buscando otras regiones, por ejemplo, este sábado, estaremos firmando un acuerdo con ASEAN que nos permitirá llegar ahí, y de los cuatro países, tres de nosotros somos miembros de APEC, y el año pasado tuvimos una reunión muy interesante en Filipinas –y el Presidente Santos también fue invitado a ir- para conversar con los países de APEC, y ellos estuvieron muy interesados.   Y creo que lo más interesante, y es algo que Susan ya mencionó, es que somos cuatro países que tenemos valores en común, pero que desde luego tenemos algunas ideas diferentes también. Sin embargo, éste es, si se me permite decirlo, un esquema de integración muy concreto, pragmático y flexible.   Pregunta 2: Acerca las complicaciones para tratados de libre comercio con Estados Unidos y Europa    Pues bien, en algunos países como el mío sucede, en el pasado, por ejemplo, cuando en Costa Rica estaban tratando de avanzar en acuerdos comerciales y de libre comercio, y la gente lo vinculaba políticamente a la clase de gobierno que teníamos. Así fue cuando enviamos a nuestra gente allí,  senadores o agentes internos que pudieran explicar a esas personas que decían una vez más por qué tres acuerdos comerciales podían ser muy positivos.   Y, por supuesto, todo en el mundo de hoy está interconectado, de tal forma que usted puede tener algunos problemas que pueden afectar a su economía, pero, por otro lado, a decir verdad, antes de que firmáramos un acuerdo de libre comercio con China, ya teníamos un problema compitiendo con China debido a que los precios no eran muy competitivos para los precios chilenos en algunas áreas.   Así que no podemos culpar a los acuerdos comerciales de algunas cuestiones, son diferentes explicaciones.   Sin embargo, sé que los cuatro países creemos de verdad en el comercio, ha sido muy positive, y lo que creo es importante es que usted tiene algunas combinaciones de acuerdos comerciales, porque los diferentes países pueden tener algunas áreas donde pueden competir, y algunas áreas en las que pueden cooperar. Si usted tiene algunos de ellos, puede mitigar las debilidades de algunos de ellos y mejorar un grupo completo de capacidades. Y ésa es la razón por la que estamos tratando de hacerlo entre nosotros.        Pregunta 3: Acerca de las metas de la Alianza del Pacífico con Chile como Presidente Pro Tempore hasta el próximo año   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, primero teníamos que encontrar cuáles iban a ser las prioridades. Nuestras prioridades son educación, innovación, ciencia y tecnología, también está el fortalecimiento e internacionalización de las Pymes y la facilitación del comercio.   Pero usted sabe que recién entramos en vigencia, entró en vigencia el protocolo, un protocolo adicional de la Alianza del Pacífico que nos proporcionará más oportunidades y posibilidades de incrementar nuestro comercio intrarregional y la inversión.   También queremos establecer una Agenda de Cooperación con estos 49 Estados Miembros Observadores, con un proyecto específico y, por supuesto, también iniciativas de desarrollo.     También tenemos dos países en la región que ya han solicitado ser miembros, miembros oficiales, y ellos son Costa Rica y Panamá. Lo de Costa Rica es un poco más oficial y Panamá, lo están solicitando, pero todavía están en discusiones internas.   Y también queremos fortalecer la convergencia con otros esquemas de integración, como ASEAN que ya mencioné, y espero APEC también.   Tres de nosotros hemos firmado el TPP y esperamos que después de la elección, nos gustaría que el Presidente Obama impulsara de tal forma que el TPP sea una realidad, aunque resulta interesante lo que dice el ministro de Economía (de México): uno de los requerimientos del TPP es que pueda entrar en vigencia cuando se represente el 80% del PIB de los países. Así que si Estados Unidos no está, desafortunadamente puede que no podamos ponerlo en funcionamiento.   Para Chile, usted sabe, señalamos que era una decisión difícil desde el punto de vista que teníamos TLC con todos los países, pero esto nos está dando mejores oportunidades.    Pregunta 4: Acerca de qué ventajas adicionales ofrece el TPP a Chile   Presidenta Bachelet: Por una parte, también nos hemos impuesto a nosotros mismos altos estándares en muchas áreas y, por otra parte, lo que hicieron algunos países, me refiero a que negociamos mejor ahora con otros países, por ejemplo, Japón y otros. Es beneficioso. Sí, será para mejorar.   Pregunta 5: Acerca Globalización y crisis de confianza de los ciudadanos   Presidenta Bachelet: Yo sólo quiero poner la perspectiva de género, creo que el mundo necesita más presidentas, pero es algo que necesitamos pensar, porque no es sólo cuando usted ve lo que ocurre en el Reino Unido con el Brexit, y cuando usted ve cómo otra gente está apoyando una u otra (opción), usted ve que la globalización no ha alcanzado a todos, no ha sido beneficiosa para todos.   Hay mucha gente donde el crecimiento económico no se ha transformado en beneficios, de tal forma que ellos se sienten frustrados y descontentos, no confían en las instituciones políticas, no confían en la sociedad empresarial.   Y creo que necesitamos abordar esto, preocuparnos de ello, necesitamos enfrentarlo, y creo que es llevarlo a discusión, como señaló el Presidente Obama ayer, también conversar sobre este asunto.   Así que necesitamos continuar haciendo las cosas buenas que se han estado haciendo en el mundo, lo bueno es que la globalización se ha expandido por el mundo, el crecimiento económico se ha extendido por el mundo, pero por otra parte tenemos que entender que esto ha sido muy desigual y que no puede continuar así.      Así que necesitamos también tomar medidas de tal forma que la gente sienta que la globalización o el TPP no son algo beneficioso para algunos grupos pequeños de personas, sino que todos van a beneficiarse de ello.   Así que lo que estoy diciendo no es sólo que lo hayan dicho los sociólogos, es lo que he percibido en mi país, es lo que percibido en todas partes, en Europa, en todas partes.   Así que lo menciono como político, en ese sentido, aunque cuando Pedro Pablo mencionó que no iba a ser político, recuerdo el día en que dejé el cargo en mi primer mandato, y había un grupo grande de hombres y mujeres y me dijeron “Señora Presidenta, le vamos a hacer una recomendación: no se involucre en política” y cuatro años después, volví como Presidenta de la República.    Pero creo que necesitamos pensar un poco más en cómo podemos hacer las cosas mejor.   Pregunta 6: Acerca de la situación política y social en Venezuela    Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, lo hemos estado haciendo, me refiero a que dentro de UNASUR, hemos creado misiones, misiones especiales de nuestros Ministerios de Relaciones Exteriores, y lo hemos estado intentando. Cuando asumí la Presidencia, justo ese día de la inauguración, hubo una reunión de todos los ministros de UNASUR y después de eso, hubo una misión ahí. De manera que lo que habíamos resuelto –eso fue en 2014- era primero la posición y que las partes se sentaran juntas, trataran de dialogar y encontrar soluciones. Pero la cosa es que no ha sido fácil, usted tiene que tener voluntad, la voluntad política para ir a negociar y ser capaz de dar algo a la otra parte. Y no ha sido fácil, nosotros continuamos haciendo esfuerzos.   Realmente estamos preocupados porque, por una parte, está el lado humanitario, usted sabe que hay carencia de productos, medicinas y otras cosas, pero una vez más “se necesita de dos para bailar tango”, quiero decir que no siempre podemos tener buenos resultados si las partes no quieren ir en esa dirección.   Continuaremos haciendo esfuerzos porque estamos preocupados de que algo pueda salirse de control. La gente tiene hambre, está teniendo problemas que pueden hacer más violenta la situación, de tal forma que continuaremos haciendo lo mejor que podamos. No es fácil, tengo que decirlo.