(Versión Original)    Dear OECD Friends:   As Secretary has mentioned, this sculpture is meant to be a long-lasting reminder of the 2016 Chilean MCM chairmanship and a humble way to thank the OECD for a long and constructive collaboration with Chile.   We came here this week to engage in discussions on how to address slow productivity growth and rising inequality, as well as possible interlinkages between them. In this exercise we are drawing on substantial OECD work on innovation and knowledge diffusion, digital economy, skill-matching and access to finance and infrastructure, among others.   But this week is also an opportunity to appreciate a piece of art, and as you have mentioned Secretary-General, this piece of art reminds us that we are human beings and calls upon us to consider the impact of this uncertain, complex, highly technological, and constantly rushing world, we live in.  This sculpture, made out of clay –one of the most archaic materials– evokes a connection to our origins. In a sense, it reminds us that we come from earth; and that we must work very hard to transform our societies to fulfill our dreams.  Just as clay can adopt different shapes, our societies’ progress depends upon the collective design and democratic implementation of the right policies. This sculpture evokes the idea of a world built together.  Present day society is permeated by the digital economy; trade, health, education, and government services are all subject to its impacts. Immediacy dominates our lives. Communication and information technologies allow us to be integrated into a development process never before imagined by our societies.  However, the pace of this transformation is uneven between countries and also within them. We should not to forget that there are people who do not have access to this reality.  This work reminds us we must put our best effort to put inclusion at the very core of our efforts.  This piece is a gift by Samy Benmayor, a well-known and widely admired contemporary Chilean artist. Thank you very much, Sammy, for your gift and for allowing us to reflect about the nature and goals of social construction using your work as an excuse.  Thank you so much.    (Traducción)    Estimados amigos de la OCDE:   Como el Secretario ha mencionado, esta escultura está destinada a ser un recordatorio de larga duración de la Presidencia Chilena de la MCM 2016 y una respetuosa forma de agradecer a la OCDE por una larga y constructiva colaboración con Chile.   Hemos venido aquí esta semana a participar en las discusiones sobre la forma de abordar el lento crecimiento de la productividad y el aumento de la desigualdad, así como las posibles interrelaciones entre ellos. En este ejercicio, nos basamos en el sustancial trabajo de la OCDE en innovación y difusión del conocimiento, economía digital, equivalencias de capacidades y acceso a la financiación e infraestructura, entre otros.   Pero esta semana es también una oportunidad para apreciar una obra de arte, y como ha mencionado usted, Secretario General, esta obra de arte nos recuerda que somos seres humanos y nos invita a que consideremos el impacto de este incierto, complejo, altamente tecnológico y constantemente apresurado mundo en el que vivimos.   Esta escultura, hecha de arcilla -uno de los materiales más antiguos- evoca una conexión con nuestros orígenes. En cierto sentido, nos recuerda que venimos de la tierra; y que hay que trabajar muy duro para transformar nuestras sociedades y cumplir nuestros sueños.   Al igual que la arcilla puede adoptar diferentes formas, el progreso de nuestras sociedades depende del diseño e implementación colectiva democrática de las políticas correctas. Esta escultura evoca la idea de un mundo que hemos construido juntos.   La sociedad actual está permeada por la economía digital; el comercio, la salud, la educación y los servicios públicos están sujetos a sus impactos. La inmediatez domina nuestras vidas. Las tecnologías de comunicación e información nos permiten estar integrados en un proceso de desarrollo nunca antes imaginado por nuestras sociedades.   Sin embargo, el ritmo de esta transformación es desigual entre los países y también dentro de ellos. No debemos olvidar que hay personas que no tienen acceso a esta realidad. Este trabajo nos recuerda que debemos poner nuestro mejor esfuerzo en posicionar la inclusión en el mismo centro de nuestros esfuerzos.   Esta pieza es un regalo de Samy Benmayor, un conocido y ampliamente admirado artista chileno contemporáneo. Muchas gracias, Sammy, por su regalo y por permitirnos reflexionar sobre la naturaleza y los objetivos de la construcción social que utilizan su trabajo como pretexto.   Muchas gracias.