(Original Speech)    Your excellences, distinguished panelists, ladies and gentleman:   It is really a great honor for me to be here today at this event, because in my whole life I’ve believed that multi-stakeholder partnerships is essential in getting our goals done and to really produce important effects. And in my personal life, as a medical doctor but also as minister and on held in afterwards as President for the first time and now for second time, I’ve really believed that the participation of different stakeholders do produce a very important and a very reliable effects because policies are more legitimate, really considering the perspective, the capacities of different groups.     I think also that multi-stakeholder partnerships help ensure that all sectors of society can contribute to the capacity of future generations to achieve their full potential. They can be active at multiple levels, from local communities to national governments.     When I was invited by the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-Moon, to join the High-level Advisory Group for Every Woman Every Child, he highlighted the importance of our continued commitment and advocacy to end all preventable deaths of women, children and adolescents by 2030 and enable them to reach their full potential.   The focus should be therefore on country-level implementation of the SDGs related to the health and wellbeing of women, children and adolescents. It also means fostering linkages to encourage collaboration and integration across the Sustainable Development Agenda, promoting cross sector partnerships.   Among many important issues, a stronger focus on early childhood development and interventions to improve adolescents’ health and wellbeing are particularly crucial. Strategic investments in early years increases chances of success and addresses very concrete challenges for my region – as well as many other countries.   It is also an opportunity to do things differently and better for the generations to come.   “Investing in the early years” is a theme that we can leverage at country level, especially since it speaks to so many other issues: it speaks of nutrition, education, water and sanitation, gender equity and empowerment, and even climate change and other environmental threats.   This is particularly true if we ensure there are strong linkages of efforts from early childhood to early adolescents. These are stepping stones for empowerment and more equitable and prosperous societies.  In the case of Chile, we have succeeded in reducing child mortality, which systematically has decreased in recent decades, and maternal mortality rate has diminished from 22.3 to 13.5 per 100,000 live births between 1997 and 2014.   This has been possible through consistent policies that have combined national immunization programs, the strengthening of newborn child care, encouraging the professional delivery assistance, and performing regular prenatal health checks and continue them during the first year of life.   In parallel, Chile has been working permanently in the strengthening of the primary health care, focusing especially on the health checks for children and in health care programs for adolescents and women.   In the case of early childhood, all primary health care actions are coordinated at the multi-sectoral level. This is true, for example, the “Chile Crece Contigo” Program –Chile grows with you– that benefits every Child born in the public health system, which covers 80 per cent of the country population. It’s not it’s covered an 80 per cent, it is covered a 100 per cent: the 80 per cent of the population has health in the public sector, the other one in the private sector. This program has improved the health of mothers and infants, and helps to detect possible delays in their development with local models of intervention to address them.   Chile has the challenge of ensuring every child, teenager or woman, the conditions that allow for the maximum development of their potential and capabilities, within a framework of respect for their fundamental rights.   We have now the opportunity to do things different and better for the generations to come.   By working together, in synergy and innovative ways, we can ensure that everyone, everywhere, has access to all that is necessary to not only survive, but thrive: good nutrition, clean water, sanitation, food security and the best standard of health.   I would like to launch a call to action for people-centered partnerships: “Leaving No One Behind” means that we will commit to tackle inequalities at country level and develop actions that target those who are furthest behind across all sectors.   We can achieve this vision together, with strong leadership. Because we know no real progress can be accomplished if we lack political will. With strong leadership, we can muster collaboration across sectors and deliver for people and communities.   I will do my part to prioritize women, children and adolescents in Latin America and encourage other leaders in this room to do the same in their respective regions and areas of action. Of course I will continue working on Every Woman Every Child for the rest of the world, and more, but that I want to say is not only to be part of the high-level panel, it’s to be playing an active role in the region or in other parts, but particularly in my region, so all our leaders take also the political will to be very strongly on this agenda.      Our horizon is 2030 and beyond. To paraphrase Sira, the little girl from the animation that we just saw, we want to go far, putting the most vulnerable first. For that, we must go together.   Thank you so much.      (Traducción)    Sus excelencias, distinguidos panelistas, damas y caballeros:     Es realmente un gran honor para mí estar aquí hoy en este evento, ya que toda mi vida he creído que las colaboraciones de múltiples partes interesadas es esencial para conseguir nuestros objetivos y realmente producir efectos importantes. Y en mi vida personal, como médico, pero también como ministra y después como Presidenta por primera vez y ahora por segunda vez, realmente he creído que la participación de las diferentes partes interesadas producen efectos muy importantes y fiables porque las políticas son más legítimas, consideran realmente la perspectiva, las capacidades de los diferentes grupos.   También creo que las colaboraciones de múltiples partes interesadas ayudan a garantizar que todos los sectores de la sociedad puedan contribuir a que las futuras generaciones puedan alcanzar su máximo potencial. Éstos pueden ser activos en múltiples niveles, desde las comunidades locales hasta los gobiernos nacionales.   Cuando fui invitada por el Secretario General a unirme al Grupo Asesor de Alto Nivel para “Every Woman, Every Child”, él destacó la importancia de nuestro compromiso y defensa, continuos, para terminar con las prevenibles muertes de mujeres, niños y adolescentes al 2030 y permitirles alcanzar su pleno potencial.   El enfoque debe ser, por tanto, sobre la aplicación a nivel nacional de los ODS relacionados con la salud y el bienestar de mujeres, niños y adolescentes. También significa fomentar los vínculos que impulsen la colaboración y la integración a través del Programa de Desarrollo Sostenible, la promoción de alianzas intersectoriales.   Entre los muchos temas importantes, son particularmente cruciales un mayor énfasis en la intervención y el desarrollo de la primera infancia para mejorar la salud y el bienestar de los adolescentes. Las inversiones estratégicas en los primeros años aumentan las posibilidades de éxito y abordan desafíos muy concretos para mi región, así como muchos otros países.   También es una oportunidad para hacer las cosas de una manera diferente y mejor para las generaciones venideras.  "La inversión en los primeros años" es un tema que podemos aprovechar en el plano nacional, sobre todo porque se habla de tantos otros temas: habla de nutrición, educación, agua y saneamiento, la equidad de género y empoderamiento, e incluso el cambio climático y otras amenazas ambientales.   Esto es particularmente cierto si nos aseguramos de que haya fuertes vínculos de esfuerzos desde la primera infancia hasta los jóvenes adolescentes. Éstos son peldaños para el empoderamiento y sociedades más equitativas y prósperas.  En el caso de Chile, hemos tenido éxito en la reducción de la mortalidad infantil, que sistemáticamente ha disminuido en las últimas décadas, y la tasa de mortalidad materna descendió de 22.3 a la 13.5 por 100.000 nacidos vivos entre 1997 y 2014.   Esto ha sido posible a través de políticas coherentes que se han combinado con programas nacionales de inmunización, el fortalecimiento de la atención del niño recién nacido, fomentando la asistencia profesional en el parto, y la realización de controles periódicos de salud prenatal y durante el primer año de vida.   Paralelamente, Chile ha estado trabajando de forma permanente en el fortalecimiento de la atención primaria de salud, con especial atención en los controles de salud para los niños y en los programas de salud para adolescentes y mujeres.   En el caso de la primera infancia, todas las acciones de atención primaria se coordinan a nivel multisectorial. Esto es así, por ejemplo, el Programa "Chile Crece Contigo", que beneficia a todos los niños nacidos en el sistema público de salud, y que cubre el 80% de la población del país. No es que esté cubierto el 80%, está cubierto el 100%: el 80% de la población tiene salud en el sector público, y el otro, en el sector privado. Este programa ha mejorado la salud de las madres y los niños, y ayuda a detectar posibles retrasos en su desarrollo con modelos locales de intervención para hacer frente a ellos.   Chile tiene el desafío de asegurar a cada niño, adolescente o mujer, las condiciones que permitan el máximo desarrollo de su potencial y capacidades, en un marco de respeto a sus derechos fundamentales.   Tenemos ahora la oportunidad de hacer las cosas de forma diferente y mejor para las generaciones venideras.   Al trabajar juntos, en sinergia y de formas innovadoras, podemos asegurar que todo el mundo, en todas partes, tenga acceso a todo lo necesario no sólo para sobrevivir, sino para desarrollarse: buena nutrición, agua potable, saneamiento, seguridad alimentaria y el mejor nivel posible de salud.   Me gustaría hacer un llamado a la acción para las colaboraciones  centradas en las personas: “Sin Olvidar a Nadie” significa que vamos a comprometernos a luchar contra las desigualdades a nivel país y desarrollar acciones destinadas a aquellos que están más atrasados en todos los sectores.   Podemos lograr esta visión en conjunto, con un fuerte liderazgo. Porque sabemos que no se puede alcanzar un progreso real si nos falta voluntad política. Con un fuerte liderazgo, podemos reunir la colaboración entre sectores y entregarla a las personas y las comunidades.   Haré mi parte para dar prioridad a las mujeres, niños y adolescentes en América Latina y animar a otros líderes en este espacio para que hagan lo mismo en sus respectivas regiones y áreas de acción. Por supuesto que voy a seguir trabajando en “Every Woman Every Child” para el resto del mundo, y más, pero lo que quiero decir es que no solamente para ser parte del panel de alto nivel, para jugar un papel activo en la región o en otras partes, pero sobre todo en mi región, para que todos nuestros líderes tomen también la voluntad política de ser muy fuertes en esta agenda.   Nuestro horizonte es 2030 y más allá. Parafraseando a Sira, la niña de la animación que acabamos de ver, queremos llegar lejos, poner en primer lugar a los más vulnerables. Por eso, tenemos que ir juntos de la mano.   Muchas gracias.