(Original Speech)     Ladies and gentleman:   I am delighted to share some views in this important event on human rights and climate change.   Today, the linkage between both subjects is undeniable. Every day we see human lives and entire communities affected by floods, droughts, hurricanes, sea-level rise and other calamities that threaten, and in many cases deprive, people of their fundamental rights.   I was heartened when reading the preamble of the Paris Agreement and -as I mentioned the first time- in indicating that “Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights”.   It was time that we recognized that solving the climate problem should not come at the expense of the rights of people. It was time that we recognized that climate policy in the 21st century cannot be conceived in isolation.   This is why I am pleased to share this event with all of you, of course, but let me specially mention to President Mary Robinson, who has promoted the concept of climate justice and made us all rethink what it actually means to have a vision to address climate change that is inclusive, just and democratic.   Let me refer to one of the most affected groups that we often forget. I am talking about children. I know this is on gender, but I want to mention children, because recently, UNICEF provided us with dramatic information that calls for urgent action.   Of course children are much more vulnerable to climate change than adults. This is due to their less developed physiology and immune systems and psychological vulnerabilities.   A case in point, the World Health Organization has estimated that climate impacts will cause 95,000 additional deaths per year due to under-nutrition in children aged 5 years or less by 2030.   In the same vein, air pollution is one of the leading causes of child death in the 21st century, killing more children under 5 than malaria and HIV/AIDS combined.   I believe that these numbers illustrate the strength of the linkage between climate change and human rights.   In the case of human rights, under the Paris Agreement, the concrete implementation of measures to protect and promote these rights are defined by countries themselves, in line with their respective obligations.   I believe that this framework provides great opportunities to build alliances and to advocate for cooperation among governments, with an active participation of civil society and other stakeholders.    In that light, only climate policies that are designed in an informed and participatory manner can achieve climate resilience and climate justice.    That is why Chile has pursued a policy of inclusion and equity in its efforts at sustainable development.    For example, since the Rio+20 Conference on Sustainable Development we have led efforts in Latin America and the Caribbean for a regional instrument on access rights to information, participation and justice. Because addressing environmental threats on the basis of human rights and participatory processes is the only way our societies can uphold the fundamental values of inclusion and equity that underlie democracy.   In that regard the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a framework in need of clear linkages with our climate policies and actions. I believe that it is urgent to establish an institutional dialogue between the Climate Change Convention and the 2030 Agenda, in order to find synergies and to avoid duplication of efforts, and also try to make participatory manner in both areas.     This is why Chile was one of the first countries in the world to announce a process of public consultations for the formulation of its INDC.  As a result we are among the group of countries that included human rights in its contribution.   It is clear that human rights initiatives in the context of climate action are the responsibilities of Parties, expressed in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). So we can actively share experiences and information on how they have included a Human Rights perspective in their NDCs.   In this regard, we have a very important milestone in 2018, in the facilitative dialogue which should include human rights and thus build momentum. Similarly, this discussion should also be considered for the first Global Stocktaking to take place in 2023.   We have discussed human rights, in general, but I believe that in this discussion we must also address specifics, such as gender equality. We are pleased about the progress that we have achieved in the Convention and, particularly, regarding the recognition of the critical importance of women empowerment in the Paris Agreement.   However, there is still much to be done. Empowerment of women and girls is not only a matter of justice. In most cases, it is also –I would say- a needed step in order to ensure that climate policies are successful.   Women and their children –as I already mentioned- are disproportionately affected by the indirect effects of climate threats as water and food shortage, and the health and nutrition problems caused by them.   Because of those reasons, if we want the measures taken to mitigate the consequences of climate change to be effective, it is essential that we incorporate in them a gender perspective and analysis, and to include women in the decision-making process.   Women are very visible in these roles at the level of implementation, but tend to be invisible at the beginning of the process, when general policies are formulated. This is why it is very relevant that gender, in the same manner as human rights, is mainstreamed in climate action. We can make a big difference, if we are able to translate this into concrete examples, in capacity building, in funding policies, in adaptation and community resilience.   Allow me to give you a few examples of what we are doing in Chile.   First of all, we are working to strengthen the abilities of rural women, who are at the forefront of the fight against climate change, and on whom our food security largely depends.   But we believe that to have good policies and good decisions, we need to ensure more women where decisions are made. So that’s why last year, we approved legislation that requires that the lists of candidates for all political parties cannot include more than 60% men or women. This will be applicable for the first place in our country -and it was very hard fight I have to say- next year to Parliament election. But also it said that our decision-made to state companies. When we arrived to government this time, we only had 4.6% female members on boards or it was only for 6%. And we put as a challenge a 40%. And after 2 year, we had…, and it is a clear, I would say, signal that political will is essential if you want to have more women in representation of boards.     This way, we will substantially increase the number of women on the decision-making process about the most relevant issues in our nation, including climate change, of course.   We have also taken important steps in strengthening our institutions. Recently we have appointed a new Vice-Minister of Human Rights, within the structure of the Ministry of Justice, who will be in charge of inter-ministerial coordination for integrating human rights in government policies in Chile. Well, she is as well also very, I would say, associative to issues of women but it also very associative to gender issues.   Climate change, human rights and gender equality are all topics that cut across the concept of development and our understanding of how to build inclusive societies.   The 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development; and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change provide key opportunities for making progress, and contributing to the justice that our societies demand.   As Ban Ki-moon says, "saving our planet, lifting people out of poverty, advancing economic growth... these are one and the same fight. We must connect the dots between climate change, water scarcity, energy shortages, global health, food security and women's empowerment. Solutions to one problem must be solutions for all."   So I encourage you to continue on this path, let us seize the opportunity of working together to a better future for our planet and for every person on Earth.   Thank you so much.   (Traducción)   Me complace compartir algunas opiniones en este importante evento sobre los derechos humanos y el cambio climático.   Hoy en día, el vínculo entre ambos temas es innegable. Todos los días vemos vidas humanas y comunidades enteras afectadas por inundaciones, sequías, huracanes, subidas del nivel del mar y otras calamidades que amenazan, y en muchos casos privan, a la gente de sus derechos fundamentales.   Me animé al leer el preámbulo del Acuerdo de París y –como ya mencioné la primera vez- indicando que "las Partes deberían, al tomar medidas para hacer frente al cambio climático, respetar, promover y considerar sus respectivas obligaciones en materia de derechos humanos".   Ya era hora de que reconociéramos que la solución del problema climático no debería darse a expensas de los derechos de las personas. Ya era hora de que reconociéramos que la política climática en el siglo XXI no puede concebirse aisladamente.   Es por eso que me complace compartir este evento con todos ustedes, por supuesto, pero permítanme mencionar especialmente a la Presidenta Mary Robinson, quien ha promovido el concepto de justicia climática y nos ha hecho repensar lo que realmente significa tener una visión para abordar el cambio climático inclusivo, justo y democrático.   Permítanme referirme a uno de los grupos más afectados, que a menudo olvidamos. Estoy hablando de los niños. Sé que esto es sobre género, pero quiero mencionar a los niños, porque recientemente, UNICEF nos proporcionó información dramática que requiere de una acción urgente.   Por supuesto, los niños son mucho más vulnerables al cambio climático que los adultos. Esto se debe a su menos desarrollada fisiología y sistemas inmunes, y vulnerabilidades psicológicas.   Un ejemplo de ello es que la Organización Mundial de la Salud ha estimado que los impactos climáticos causarán 95 mil muertes adicionales por año, debido a la subnutrición en niños de 5 o menos años para 2030.   En el mismo sentido, la contaminación atmosférica es una de las principales causas de muerte infantil en el siglo XXI, que mata a más niños menores de 5 años que la malaria y el VIH / SIDA combinados.  Creo que estos números ilustran la fuerza del vínculo entre el cambio climático y los derechos humanos.   En el caso de los derechos humanos, en el marco del Acuerdo de París, la aplicación concreta de medidas para proteger y promover estos derechos, son definidas por los propios países, de acuerdo con sus respectivas obligaciones.   Creo que este marco brinda grandes oportunidades para construir alianzas y abogar por la cooperación entre los gobiernos, con la participación activa de la sociedad civil y otras partes interesadas.   Desde ese punto de vista, sólo las políticas climáticas diseñadas de manera informada y participativa pueden lograr la resiliencia y justicia climáticas.   Es por eso que Chile ha seguido una política de inclusión y equidad en sus esfuerzos por un desarrollo sostenible.   Por ejemplo, desde la Conferencia de Rio+20 sobre Desarrollo Sostenible, hemos dirigido esfuerzos en América Latina y el Caribe por un instrumento regional sobre derechos de acceso a la información, la participación y la justicia. Porque abordar las amenazas ambientales sobre la base de los derechos humanos y los procesos participativos es la única manera en que nuestras sociedades pueden sostener los valores fundamentales de inclusión y equidad que subyacen a la democracia.   A este respecto, la Agenda 2030 para el Desarrollo Sostenible es un marco en el que se necesitan claros vínculos con nuestras políticas y acciones climáticas. Creo que es urgente establecer un diálogo institucional entre la Convención sobre el Cambio Climático y la Agenda 2030, a fin de encontrar sinergias y evitar la duplicación de esfuerzos, y así tratar de lograr formas participativas en ambas áreas.     Es por eso que Chile fue uno de los primeros países en el mundo en anunciar un proceso de consultas públicas para la formulación de su CPDN. Como resultado, estamos entre el grupo de países que incluyeron los derechos humanos en su contribución.   Es evidente que las iniciativas de derechos humanos en el contexto de la acción climática son las responsabilidades de las Partes, expresadas en sus Contribuciones Determinadas a Nivel Nacional (CDN). De manera que podemos compartir activamente experiencias e información sobre cómo han incluido una perspectiva de derechos humanos en sus CDN.   En este sentido, tenemos un hito muy importante en 2018, en el diálogo de facilitación que debe incluir los derechos humanos y así generar impulso. Del mismo modo, esta discusión también debe ser considerada para el primer Global Stocktaking (Balance Global), que tendrá lugar en 2023.   Hemos discutido los derechos humanos en general, pero creo que en esta discusión también debemos abordar aspectos específicos, como la igualdad de género. Nos complace el progreso que hemos logrado en la Convención y, en particular, en lo que respecta al reconocimiento de la importancia fundamental del empoderamiento de la mujer en el Acuerdo de París.   Sin embargo, todavía queda mucho por hacer. El empoderamiento de mujeres y niñas no es sólo una cuestión de justicia. En la mayoría de los casos, también es –yo diría- un paso necesario para asegurar que las políticas climáticas tengan éxito.   Además, las mujeres y sus hijos –como ya mencioné- se ven afectados de manera desproporcionada por los efectos indirectos de las amenazas climáticas como la escasez de agua y alimentos y los problemas de salud y nutrición causados por éstos.   Por estas razones, si queremos que las medidas adoptadas para mitigar las consecuencias del cambio climático sean eficaces, es esencial incorporar en ellas una perspectiva y un análisis de género, e incluir a las mujeres en el proceso de toma de decisiones.   Las mujeres son muy visibles en estos roles a nivel de implementación, pero tienden a ser invisibles al inicio del proceso, cuando se formulan políticas generales. Por eso es muy importante que el género, al igual que los derechos humanos, se integre en la acción climática. Podemos hacer una gran diferencia, si somos capaces de traducir esto en ejemplos concretos, en la creación de capacidad, en las políticas de financiación, en la adaptación y la resiliencia de la comunidad.   Permítanme darles algunos ejemplos de lo que estamos haciendo en Chile.   En primer lugar, estamos trabajando para fortalecer las capacidades de las mujeres rurales, que están a la vanguardia de la lucha contra el cambio climático, y de quienes dependen en gran medida nuestra seguridad alimentaria.   Pero creemos que para tener buenas políticas y buenas decisiones, necesitamos asegurar que haya más mujeres donde se toman las decisiones. Por eso es que  aprobamos una legislación que requiere que las listas de candidatos para todos los partidos políticos, no incluyeran más del 60% hombres o mujeres. Esto será aplicable por primera vez en nuestro país –y fue una dura lucha, debo decir- el próximo año para las elecciones al Parlamento. Pero también mencionar nuestras decisiones respecto a las empresas públicas Cuando llegamos al gobierno en esta ocasión, sólo teníamos un 4,6% de mujeres en directorios, o sólo un 6%. Y nos pusimos como desafío un 40%. Y después de dos años, teníamos un… y es una clara señal de que la voluntad política es esencial si ustedes quieren tener más mujeres representadas en los directorios.     De esta manera, aumentaremos sustancialmente el número de mujeres en el proceso de toma de decisiones sobre los temas más relevantes de nuestra nación, incluido el cambio climático, por supuesto.   También hemos dado pasos importantes en el fortalecimiento de nuestras instituciones. Recientemente hemos nombrado a un nuevo Viceministro de Derechos Humanos, dentro de la estructura del Ministerio de Justicia, que estará a cargo de la coordinación interministerial para la integración de los derechos humanos en las políticas gubernamentales en Chile. Bueno, ella también está muy, yo diría, relacionada a los temas de mujer, también a los temas de género.   El cambio climático, los derechos humanos y la igualdad de género son temas que trascienden el concepto de desarrollo y nuestra comprensión de cómo construir sociedades inclusivas.   La Agenda 2030 de Desarrollo Sostenible y el Acuerdo de París sobre el Cambio Climático ofrecen importantes oportunidades para avanzar y contribuir a la justicia que exigen nuestras sociedades.   Como dice Ban Ki-moon, "salvar nuestro planeta, sacar a la gente de la pobreza, hacer avanzar el crecimiento económico... son una y la misma lucha. Debemos conectar los puntos entre el cambio climático, la escasez de agua, la falta de energía, la salud mundial, la seguridad alimentaria y el empoderamiento de la mujer. Las soluciones a un problema deben ser soluciones para todos".   Así que les animo a continuar en este camino, aprovechemos la oportunidad de trabajar juntos para un futuro mejor para nuestro planeta y para cada persona en la Tierra.   Muchas gracias.