(Versión original)     Ladies and gentlemen:  This is my first time in Chile Day and I am very pleased to be here. I thank InBest for organizing and giving continuity to this initiative.  Chile Day is a traditional event that we carry out in different countries and cities. This is the sixth time that this event will take place in London, at the heart of the global financial community, and a sign of the strong ties between Chile and the United Kingdom.  Today, I want to share some brief thoughts regarding the importance of the United Kingdom as a trading partner and investor in Chile, as well as providing some insight about how we are dealing with the economic slowdown and the end of “commodities super-cycle”.  Chile is a relatively small country, but one that in the last twenty-five years has been successful in its integration into very competitive markets.  Thanks to high growth rates, we have been able to decrease our poverty rate from over 38% to just below 8%, and have reached a PPP-adjusted GDP per capita of US$23,000, the highest in the region.   We are a globalized economy, with a wide network of trade agreements:  25 FTAs with 64 countries, accounting for 94% of Chile’s exports. More than 60% of our GDP is linked to trade.  Nonetheless, despite a sustained effort to improve our competitiveness and our productivity, today we face new challenges.  We are witnesses of an economic slowdown and a steep fall in the prices of most commodities, the centerpiece of the export strategy of most Latin American economies, creating low growth and poor economic conditions.  China’s economic shift from investment in infrastructure to investment in consumption is part of the reason behind the end of the commodities boom.  Long term prices for copper, Chile´s main export, indicate a value decline of 13.8%, prompting the government to implement a moderate fiscal adjustment, unlike other countries of the region that have made greater sacrifices. But what does this mean for Chile?  It means that we have to make a change towards a new economic structure. As Alfredo Ergas was telling us, we know we have been doing well, but if we’d not have done what we are doing, we are going to be -I mean- not the leaders, that’s what is, so we need to think what of the kind of changes and the things we need to do. We can´t continue to depend on commodity exports; our main challenge is to add value to our products and to participate more fully in the knowledge-intensive society. We have to integrate ourselves to global and regional value chains.  Before talking about how we are addressing these issues at home, let me have a few words about the importance of our trade and investment relations with the United Kingdom.  Our bilateral trade with the UK is regulated by the Association Agreement between the EU and Chile that entered into force in February 2003.  This Agreement led to a significant increase in trade in goods and services between Chile and the EU, more than doubling it since 2003, from US$ 7.3 billion in 2003 to 17.4 billion in 2015.  With the UK, bilateral trade reached US$ 1.2 billion in 2015.  Chile is the UK’s second largest export destination in South America despite having only the sixth largest population. In fact, Chile is one of the most important suppliers of wine to the UK, as well as of products such as blueberries, plums and avocados. And I have already congratulated a lot to Lord Mayor for his birthday, but it depends things that I have is that I have committed with enthusiasm with very good Chilean wine to celebrate his birthday.    Regarding investment, the UK is the fourth largest overall foreign investor with total investment through Decree Law N°600 during the period of 2009–2014 adding over US$6 billion. In the mining industry, the UK is the second biggest investor, with 15% of total mining investment.   Claiming that mining is important to Chile is an understatement, with 9% of its GDP and half of its exports, mining is part of the backbone of the Chilean economy. Chile is also the largest mine producer of copper in the world, with a market share of nearly 30% of total global production.  In order for the mining industry to prosper in a small but open economy, like Chile, connectivity to the world’s markets is crucial.  We believe that an important way to encourage greater trade and investment is through the modernization of our Association Agreement with the EU. This Agreement is broad and comprehensive but it was negotiated over 12 years ago and needs to be updated in order to catch up to the global standard in trade discipline as well as to increase cooperation in areas such as innovation, education, science and technology. So, Minister, we hope to count on the support of the British government and of its private sector in our endeavor to start negotiations by the end of this year. So we hope you stay in the European Union. So, this FTA between Chile and you has been good for Chile but it has also been very good for UK.  Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has been key to our economic success, which is why we have recently enacted some reforms in order to attract more foreign investment. In recent years, FDI has shown a sustained increase, improving Chile’s competitiveness and contributing not only resources but also greater technological development, employment, know-how and inputs conducive to innovation and entrepreneurship.  Chile´s longstanding political and economic stability, its transparency and competitiveness, as well as its excellent business prospects positions the country as an excellent destination for foreign investment in Latin America and one of the world’s leading destinations.  Because of its infrastructure and connectivity, it also serves as a platform for conducting business throughout the region. Chile is a stable country that values and protects foreign investments. In its World Investment Report 2015, UNCTAD ranked Chile as the world´s 11th largest recipient of foreign direct investment in 2014. With an inflow of US$23,000 million in 2014, the second biggest in Latin America after Brazil. Also, in the 2014-2015 Global Competitiveness Index published by the World Economic Forum, Chile ranked 33 out of 144 economies, ahead of all other Latin American countries.  Our new law on Foreign Direct Investment, was published on June 2015. This new law replaces the previous decree and establishes guarantees for foreign investors and creates the Foreign Investment Promotion Agency, as a replacement to the Foreign Investment Committee.  The new Law provides for the possibility for foreign investors to enter into new investment contracts, under similar terms and conditions, as those negotiated under Decree Law 600. Furthermore, all foreign investment contracts subscribed before January 1st 2016, under Decree Law 600, will remain in force. In addition, the new law provides for a tax invariability of 44.45% for a period of up to 4 years, beginning on January 1st 2016.  In the context of this Chile Day, I would like to extend an invitation to your companies to come to Chile and invest in our country. Chile has thriving opportunities in mining, energy, infrastructure, tourism and the food industry, to mention some. Our government has developed initiatives in many of these areas, which means that we will require new private investment in key sectors of our economy.  For example, mining companies plan to invest US$104 billion in Chile over the next eight years and our government’s Strategic Program in mining will work on creating world class supplies for the industry, capable of providing equipment, engineering services and construction support, establishing our country as a base for exporting to all of Latin America. And this was a part of what we were discussing in the morning with Prime Minister Cameron, how we can also cooperate on these areas.  The same is happening in the energy sector, with new investment in generation and transmission, or in infrastructure, with the new investment fund for US$9 billion. The food industry takes advantage of our natural diversity as well as our ample access to international markets. Each day almost 17 million people drink a glass –some times more than a glass- of Chilean wine, which speaks of our potential to reach new markets with good quality products and services.  An added incentive for investors is our full commitment to fight corruption, including thorough new legislation that will help us to avoid cases of corruption. According to the corruption perception index prepared by Transparency International, Chile scores 70, ranking 23 out of 168 countries, which is not bad, but as you probably agree, this is an issue that requires constant attention and is of particular importance in order to safeguard the legitimacy of our democracies. In the morning, we have praised Primer Minister Cameron for the Anticorruption Summit and announcements that they have done there. We will be willing to be part of this initiative.    Let me say a couple of words about capital market.  It is annually indeed for what the country to present itself as we are doing at this Chile Day. We are integrating a delegation of government officials, regulators and issuers, representative of financial activities. We have such as groups to remind the world that Chile is a great place to invest and an excellent platform for doing business across the region. We have been collecting ideas to make our capital market more competitive and I trust that further cooperation between the public and private sector will expand our financial sector and industry, renews far beyond as borders for their capabilities and re-abilities.    Just a word on something that sometimes I know it preoccupies people.  My Administration is driving much needed changes to safeguard the foundations for legitimized and sustainable requires for growth and long term development. We are conscious that changes brings doubts  and uncertainty, that’s why our process involve engagement and dialogue recognizing that people see the country differently and they hold different opinions about we need to be done.  So, I know that Finance Minister I told you about the Constitution process we are supporting. That effort of Chile it doesn’t not fix to leave our progress by the wayside, on the contrary, we see the efforts together that Chile has, which both the current and future generations aspire to live.  A few days ago, I attended to the dinner or a breakfast –a breakfast I think- at the Chilean Chamber of Construction. The chamber expressed the group interest in participating in this process and they also gave me sort of a book with their proposals. And I believe that this provides strongly that it is possible that ensure that a new Constitution will raise it with all citizens, businesses and workmen and women.  So, let me speak a little about productivity.  We have a healthy economy, well-prepared to with the current and complicated external conditions; though with the trouble done in the supercycle for cooper and conscious it need them move to a greater diversification.  As a result, this administration is seeking to place for sharp actions on productivity. We need to do more with the same resources and that’s the message and the target for those public and private sectors. So that’s why we have designated this year 2016 as the Year of Productivity. We know that productivity will not be solved in one year, but it was to put an accent on and continue working afterwards, of course.  So we believe by working together, joining forces in ideas and efforts, we can be more productive, both with new things and the things in which we have excelled more efficiently. We have already received some proposals from business community and the National Commission on Productivity and we are eager to receive new ideas from other players.  As an administration, we are promoting a number of initiative to foster growth including the Agenda on Growth, Innovation and Productivity, the Agenda on Energy, policies to improves how market operate and to foster competition. And the education reform which is core goal for ensuring the Chile’s human capital.  We recently announced a package of 22 measures which seek to encourage finances, foster the services and reduce rates, all our efforts to promote entrepreneurship and investment. Moreover, the Central Bank has proposed an initiative for stopping the emission of low value coins in order to simplify transactions and reduce costs.  All these measure will increase the efficiency and productivity of our economy. So we have to put accent to build to the progress containing the legal changes need to get this project is moving. Furthermore, as you knew recently -it was mentioned I think by Alfredo Ergas- we have recently sent a bill to Congress to create an Infrastructure Fund and an effort to expand and find opportunities for much needed infrastructure. This Fund is yet and another example of public-private collaboration in this arena.       Dear Friends:  I have addressed some of the issues that represent challenges for our country and our response to them.  We know sustainable development does not just happen, but rather is the result of good public policies, which ensure the formation of human capital, access and promotion of technology and innovation, the fostering of public - private partnerships, attract investment and promote trade, among other factors. We encourage you to continue making a contribution to the fulfillment of this goal.  We encourage that you believe in Chile; Chile welcomes you.  Thank you so much.   *****    (Traducción)      Damas y caballeros:  Ésta es mi primera vez en el Chile Day y estoy muy contenta de estar aquí. Agradezco a InBest por organizar y dar continuidad a esta iniciativa.  Chile Day es un evento tradicional que llevamos a cabo en diferentes países y ciudades. Ésta es la sexta vez que se llevará a cabo este evento en Londres, en el corazón de la comunidad financiera mundial, y un signo de los fuertes lazos entre Chile y el Reino Unido.  Hoy, quiero compartir algunas breves reflexiones sobre la importancia del Reino Unido como socio comercial e inversionista en Chile, así como proporcionar algunas apreciaciones acerca de cómo estamos tratando la desaceleración económica y el fin de "los súperciclos de los commodities”.  Chile es un país relativamente pequeño, pero que en los últimos 25 años ha tenido éxito en su integración en mercados muy competitivos. Gracias a las altas tasas de crecimiento, hemos sido capaces de disminuir nuestra tasa de pobreza de más del 38% hasta justo por debajo del 8%, y hemos alcanzado un PIB ajustado al PPA per cápita de US$ 23.000, el más alto de la región.  Somos una economía globalizada, con una amplia red de acuerdos comerciales: 25 acuerdos de libre comercio con 64 países, que representan el 94% de las exportaciones chilenas. Más del 60% de nuestro PIB está vinculado al comercio.  No obstante, a pesar de un esfuerzo sostenido para mejorar nuestra competitividad y nuestra productividad, hoy en día nos enfrentamos a nuevos desafíos. Somos testigos de una desaceleración económica y una fuerte caída de los precios de casi todos commodities, la pieza central de la estrategia de exportación de la mayoría de las economías de América Latina, lo que ha generado bajo crecimiento y malas condiciones económicas.  El cambio económico de China desde la inversión en infraestructura a la inversión en el consumo es parte de la razón detrás del final del auge de los commodities. Los precios a largo plazo para el cobre, el principal producto de exportación de Chile, indican una disminución del valor del 13,8%, lo que llevó al Gobierno a aplicar un ajuste fiscal moderado, a diferencia de otros países de la región que han hecho mayores sacrificios.  Pero ¿qué significa esto para Chile?  Significa que tenemos que hacer un cambio hacia una nueva estructura económica. Como Alfredo Ergas nos estaba diciendo, sabemos que lo hemos estado haciendo bien, pero si no hubiéramos hecho lo que estamos haciendo, no seríamos –quiero decir- líderes, es lo que es, así que tenemos que pensar en el tipo de cambio y las cosas que tenemos que hacer. No podemos seguir dependiendo de las exportaciones de commodities; nuestro principal desafío es agregar valor a nuestros productos y participar más plenamente en la sociedad del conocimiento. Tenemos que integrarnos a las cadenas de valores mundiales y regionales.  Antes de referirme a cómo estamos abordando estas cuestiones a nivel nacional, permítanme referirme un poco acerca de la importancia de nuestras relaciones comerciales y de inversión con el Reino Unido.  Nuestro comercio bilateral con el Reino Unido está regulado por el Acuerdo de Asociación entre la UE y Chile, que entró en vigor en febrero de 2003. Este acuerdo dio lugar a un aumento significativo en el comercio de bienes y servicios entre Chile y la Unión Europea, más del doble desde el año 2003, desde US$ 7,3 mil millones en 2003 a US$17, 4 mil millones en 2015.  Con el Reino Unido, el comercio bilateral alcanzó los US$ 1,2 mil millones en 2015. Chile es el segundo destino de las exportaciones del Reino Unido en América del Sur a pesar de tener sólo la sexta población más grande. De hecho, Chile es uno de los proveedores más importantes de vino al Reino Unido, así como de productos como arándanos, ciruelas y paltas. Y ya he felicitado mucho al Lord Mayor por su cumpleaños, pero dependiendo de las cosas que tenga es que me he comprometido entusiastamente con muy buen vino chileno para celebrar su cumpleaños.  En cuanto a la inversión, el Reino Unido es el cuarto mayor inversionista general extranjero, con una inversión total a través del Decreto Ley N°600 durante el período de 2009 a 2014, sumando más de US$ 6 mil billones. En la industria de la minería, el Reino Unido es el segundo mayor inversionista, con un 15% de la inversión total de la minería.  Afirmar que la minería es importante para Chile es un eufemismo, con el 9% de su PIB y la mitad de sus exportaciones, la minería es parte de la columna vertebral de la economía chilena. Chile es también el mayor productor de cobre en el mundo, con una cuota de mercado de casi el 30% de la producción mundial total.  Para que la industria minera prospere en una economía pequeña pero abierta, como la de Chile, es crucial la conectividad a los mercados de todo el mundo.  Creemos que una manera importante de fomentar un mayor comercio e inversión es a través de la modernización de nuestro Acuerdo de Asociación con la UE. Este Acuerdo es amplio y completo, pero se negoció hace más de 12 años y necesita ser actualizado con el fin de ponerse al día con el estándar mundial en la disciplina de comercio, así como aumentar la cooperación en áreas como la innovación, la educación, la ciencia y la tecnología. De tal manera, Ministro, que esperamos contar con el apoyo del Gobierno Británico y de su sector privado en nuestro esfuerzo por iniciar negociaciones a finales de este año. Así que, esperamos que usted esté en la Unión Europea. Porque el Tratado de Libre de Comercio entre Chile y ustedes ha sido bueno para Chile, pero también muy bueno para el Reino Unido.  La Inversión Extranjera Directa (IED) ha sido clave para nuestro éxito económico, por lo que recientemente hemos aprobado algunas reformas con el fin de atraer más inversión extranjera. En los últimos años, la IED ha mostrado un aumento sostenido, mejorando la competitividad de Chile y contribuyendo no sólo recursos, sino también un mayor desarrollo tecnológico, empleo, conocimiento técnico y aportaciones conducentes a la innovación y el espíritu empresarial.  La larga estabilidad política y económica de Chile, su transparencia y competitividad, así como sus excelentes perspectivas de negocio, posiciona al país como un excelente destino para la inversión extranjera en América Latina y uno de los principales destinos del mundo. Debido a su infraestructura y conectividad, también sirve como plataforma para la realización de negocios en toda la región.  Chile es un país estable que valora y protege las inversiones extranjeras. En su Informe Mundial de Inversiones 2015, la UNCTAD clasificó a Chile como el 11° mayor receptor de inversión extranjera directa en el año 2014. Con un flujo de entrada de US$ 23 mil millones en 2014, el segundo más grande de América Latina, después de Brasil. Asimismo, en el Índice de Competitividad Global 2014-2015 publicado por el Foro Económico Mundial, Chile se ubicó en el 33° de las 144 economías, por delante de todos los demás países de América Latina.  Nuestra nueva Ley de Inversión Extranjera Directa se publicó en junio de 2015. Esta nueva ley sustituye al anterior decreto, establece garantías para los inversionistas extranjeros y crea la Agencia de Promoción de la Inversión Extranjera, como reemplazo para el Comité de Inversiones Extranjeras.  La nueva Ley prevé la posibilidad de que los inversionistas extranjeros celebren nuevos contratos de inversión, en términos y condiciones similares a las negociadas en virtud del Decreto Ley 600. Por otra parte, todos los contratos de inversión extranjera suscritos antes del 1 de enero de 2016, contenidos en el Decreto Ley 600, permanecerán en vigor. Además, la nueva ley prevé una invariabilidad tributaria del 44.45% por un período de hasta 4 años, comenzando el 1 de enero de 2016.  En el contexto de este Chile Day, me gustaría extender una invitación a sus empresas para venir a Chile e invertir en nuestro país. Chile tiene prósperas oportunidades en minería, energía, infraestructura, turismo e industria alimentaria, por mencionar algunas. Nuestro Gobierno ha desarrollado iniciativas en muchas de estas áreas, lo que significa que vamos a requerir nuevas inversiones privadas en sectores clave de nuestra economía.  Por ejemplo, las empresas mineras planean invertir US$ 104 mil millones en Chile durante los próximos 8 años y nuestro Programa Estratégico de Minería del Gobierno va a trabajar en la creación de suministros de clase mundial para la industria, capaces de proporcionar equipos, ingeniería y servicios de apoyo a la construcción, estableciendo nuestro país como base para la exportación a toda América Latina. Y esto fue parte de lo que estábamos discutiendo en la mañana con el primer ministro Cameron, cómo podemos cooperar en estas áreas.  Lo mismo ocurre en el sector energético, con nuevas inversiones en generación y transmisión, o en infraestructura, con el nuevo fondo de inversión de US$ 9 mil millones. La industria alimentaria aprovecha nuestra diversidad natural, así como nuestro amplio acceso a los mercados internacionales. Cada día, casi 17 millones de personas beben una copa –algunas veces, más de una copa- de vino chileno, lo que habla de nuestro potencial para llegar a nuevos mercados con productos y servicios de buena calidad.  Un incentivo adicional para los inversionistas es nuestro pleno compromiso de luchar contra la corrupción, incluida la exhaustiva nueva legislación que nos ayudará a evitar casos de corrupción. De acuerdo con el Índice de Percepción de la Corrupción elaborado por Transparencia Internacional, Chile puntúa 70, situándose en el 23° de los 168 países, lo cual no es malo, pero como probablemente ustedes estarán de acuerdo, éste es un asunto que requiere atención constante y es de particular importancia para salvaguardar la legitimidad de nuestras democracias. Por la mañana, hemos elogiado al Primer Ministro Cameron para la Cumbre Anticorrupción y los anuncios que han hecho allí. Estamos dispuestos a ser parte de esta iniciativa.  Permítanme decir un par de palabras sobre el mercado de capitales. Es de hecho por lo cual cada año el país se presenta así mismo como lo estamos haciendo en este Chile Day. Estamos integrando una delegación de funcionarios gubernamentales, reguladores, emisores, representantes de actividades financieras. Tenemos tales grupos para recordar al mundo que Chile es un gran lugar para invertir y una excelente plataforma para hacer negocios en toda la región. Hemos estado recogiendo ideas para hacer que nuestro mercado de capitales sea más competitivo y confiamos que más cooperación entre el sector público y privado expandirá nuestro sector financiero y la industria, renovando mucho más allá de las fronteras de sus capacidades y capacitaciones.  Sólo unas palabras sobre algo que a veces sé preocupa a la gente.  Mi Gobierno está impulsando cambios muy necesarios para salvaguardar las bases legitimadas y sostenibles que se requiere para el crecimiento y el desarrollo a largo plazo. Somos conscientes de que los cambios traen dudas e incertidumbre, por eso nuestro proceso implica la participación y el diálogo, reconociendo que la gente ve el país de manera diferente y que tienen diferentes opiniones acerca de que tenemos que hacer.  Por lo tanto, sé que el ministro de Finanzas les habló del proceso constitucional que estamos apoyando. Ese esfuerzo de Chile no nos obliga a salirnos del camino de progreso, por el contrario, vemos los esfuerzos en conjunto que Chile tiene, que tanto las generaciones actuales como las futuras aspiran para vivir.   Hace unos días, asistí a la cena o un desayuno –desayuno, creo que era- de la Cámara Chilena de la Construcción. La Cámara expresó el interés del grupo en participar en este proceso y que también me entregaron una especie de libro con sus propuestas. Y creo que esto prueba firmemente que es posible asegurar una surgirá nueva Constitución con todos los ciudadanos, las empresas y los trabajadores, hombres y mujeres.  Por eso, permítanme hablar un poco sobre productividad.  Tenemos una economía sana y bien preparada para las actuales y complicadas condiciones, aunque con el problema del fin del súperciclo del cobre y conscientes de que se necesita moverla a una mayor diversificación.  En consecuencia, este Gobierno está tratando de posicionar fuertes medidas en productividad. Necesitamos hacer más con los mismos recursos y ése es el mensaje y el objetivo para los sectores públicos y privados. Por eso, hemos designado este año 2016 como el “Año de la Productividad”. Sabemos que la productividad no se resolverá en un año, pero se trató de poner el acento en seguir trabajando luego, por supuesto.  Por lo tanto, creemos que trabajando juntos, uniendo fuerzas en ideas y esfuerzos, podemos ser más productivos, tanto con cosas nuevas como en las que hemos sobresalido de manera más eficiente. Ya hemos recibido algunas propuestas de la comunidad empresarial y de la Comisión Nacional de Productividad y estamos ansiosos de recibir nuevas ideas de otros actores.  Como Gobierno, estamos promoviendo una serie de iniciativas para fomentar el crecimiento, incluyendo la Agenda de Productividad, Innovación y Crecimiento, la Agenda de Energía, políticas para mejorar la forma en que opera el mercado e incentivar la competencia. Y la reforma de educacional, que es le meta central para asegurar el capital humano de Chile.  Recientemente, hemos anunciado un paquete de 22 medidas que buscan fomentar las finanzas, fomentar los servicios y reducir las tasas, todos esfuerzos para promover el espíritu empresarial y la inversión. Por otra parte, el Banco Central ha propuesto una iniciativa para eliminar la emisión de monedas de bajo valor, con el fin de simplificar las transacciones y reducir los costos.  Todas estas medidas incrementarán la eficiencia y la productividad de nuestra economía. Así que tenemos que poner énfasis en construir el progreso que contenga los cambios legales que se necesitan para lograr que éste se mueva.  Por otra parte, como ustedes se enteraron recientemente –creo que Alfredo Ergas lo mencionó- hemos enviado recientemente un proyecto de ley al Congreso para crear un Fondo de Infraestructura, un esfuerzo para ampliar y encontrar las oportunidades para más infraestructura necesaria. Este Fondo está aún otro ejemplo de la colaboración pública-privada en este ámbito. Queridos amigos:  He abordado algunas de las cuestiones que representan desafíos para nuestro país y nuestra respuesta a ellos. Sabemos que el desarrollo sostenible no sucede de forma repentina, sino que más bien es el resultado de buenas políticas públicas, que garanticen la formación de capital humano, el acceso y la promoción de la tecnología y la innovación, el fomento de las asociaciones público-privadas, atraer la inversión y promover el comercio, entre otros factores. Les animamos a seguir haciendo contribuciones para cumplir con este objetivo.   Les animamos a que crean en Chile, Chile les da la bienvenida.   Muchas gracias.