(Original Speech)     Excellencies, Prime Minister, Dear friends:   Well, Chile supports completely what all the statements that we’ve done, I am sure that´s it, but I am going to speak a little more.   Well, it has been said already, so I think it is so clear for all of us that the global economy and the world are facing very important challenges. As Guy was mentioning, I have those in my words, in my statement, and it is that among is that’s why spreads the belief that the benefits of globalization, on one hand, but also economic growth have not reached all the segments of the population.   In our case, our national response has been to prioritize an agenda based on the same principles as the Global Deal initiative. Because we are convinced that economic growth alone will not reduce inequality gaps; rather we must effectively and decisively deploy an array of tools. To begin with, sustainable growth and decent work and social dialogue must go together if we really want sustainable development.   If not, we will continue to confront limited growth, diminished creation of new and better jobs, less productivity and more discontent among citizens. Such scenario is not acceptable. That´s why decent work plays an essential role in our reform agenda.   If we want public policies to be relevant, they must address issues of concern for citizens, such as the empowerment of women, women labor conditions, the fight against child labor, youth employment, the inclusion of indigenous peoples, as well as the support for middle class families.   So I do believe that decent work is the cornerstone upon which we build well-being. Not only does it provide an opportunity to earn a better income, but it can also strengthen people’s self-worth, the stability of their families and peace in their communities. This, in turn, enables economic and social development, which strengthens our democracies.   Decent work has become a global goal referred to in objective n° 8 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It calls to “promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work all”.    And I think the international basis for addressing this issue are, of course, all the basis in the United Nations, the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and today the Global Deal.   Chile has been working to make this a reality. We recently adopted reforms to our labor code, including the improvement of conditions for collective bargaining and narrowing the gender gap in union leadership and decision making.   In addition, Chile´s National Action Plan on Human Rights and Business aims at ensuring the State’s adequate protection of Human Rights; encouraging respect of these rights in company’s activities and improving access to reparation mechanisms available to those affected.   We have also entered into a tripartite agreement, the “National Decent Work Program”, under the ILO Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy.   Prime Minister, friends:   As government, business and labor leaders, we face mayor challenges, but there is a path. I am convinced that the Global Deal initiative will help future generations live in a more integrated, dynamic, diverse and safe world.   So personally I’ve pledged to work with other heads of State in Latin America to promote the initiative and achieve a great support for its implementation.     You can count on Chile to be an active participant and promoter of the Global Deal.   Let´s work together to make it happen!   Thank you for this opportunity.     (Traducción)      Excelencias, Primer Ministro, Queridos Amigos:   Bueno, Chile apoya completamente todas las declaraciones que hemos hecho, estoy segura que es así, pero voy a hablar un poco más al respecto.   Bueno, ya se ha dicho, por lo que creo que está muy claro para todos nosotros que la economía mundial y el mundo están enfrentando importantes desafíos. Como mencionaba Guy, y lo tengo entre mis palabras, en mis declaraciones, y entre ellas, está el por qué se divulga la creencia de que los beneficios de la globalización, por un lado, pero también el crecimiento económico, no han llegado a todos los segmentos de la población.   En nuestro caso, nuestra respuesta nacional ha sido la de dar prioridad a una agenda basada en los mismos principios que la iniciativa Global Deal. Porque estamos convencidos que el crecimiento económico por sí solo no va a reducir las brechas de desigualdad; más bien debemos desplegar con eficacia y decisión una serie de herramientas. Para empezar, el crecimiento sostenible y el trabajo digno deben ir de la mano, si queremos realmente desarrollo sostenible.   Si no, continuaremos frente a un crecimiento limitado, disminución de la creación de nuevos y mejores puestos de trabajo, menor productividad y más descontento entre los ciudadanos. Tal escenario no es aceptable. Por eso, el trabajo digno juega un papel esencial en nuestro programa de reforma.   Si queremos que las políticas públicas sean relevantes, éstas deben abordar cuestiones de interés para los ciudadanos, como el empoderamiento de la mujer, condiciones labores para las mujeres, la lucha contra el trabajo infantil, el empleo juvenil, la inclusión de los pueblos indígenas, así como el apoyo a las familias de clase media.   De manera que creo que el trabajo digno es la piedra angular sobre la que construimos bienestar. No sólo proporciona una oportunidad de ganar un mejor ingreso, sino que también puede fortalecer la autoestima de la gente, la estabilidad de sus familias y la paz en sus comunidades. Esto, a su vez, permite el desarrollo económico y social, lo que refuerza nuestras democracias.   El trabajo digno se ha convertido en un objetivo global al que se hace referencia en el objetivo N° 8 de la Agenda 2030 para el Desarrollo Sostenible. Llama a "promover el crecimiento económico sostenido, inclusivo y sostenible, el empleo pleno y productivo y el trabajo digno para todos".   Y creo que las bases internacionales para abordar este tema están, por su supuesto, en las bases de las Naciones Unidas, las Directrices de la OECD para las Empresas Multinacionales, y hoy la Iniciativa Acuerdo Global.   Chile ha estado trabajando para hacer de esto una realidad. Hemos adoptado recientemente reformas a nuestro código de trabajo, incluyendo la mejora de las condiciones para la negociación colectiva y la reducción de la brecha de género en la dirección del sindicato y la toma de decisiones.   Además, el Plan Nacional de Acción de Derechos Humanos y de Negocios de Chile tiene como objetivo garantizar una protección adecuada del Estado a los Derechos Humanos; el fomento del respeto de estos derechos en las actividades de la empresa y mejorar el acceso a los mecanismos de reparación a disposición de los afectados.   También hemos llegado a un acuerdo tripartito, el "Programa Nacional de Trabajo Digno", en virtud de la Declaración Tripartita de Principios sobre las Empresas Multinacionales y Política Social de la OIT.   Primer ministro, amigos:   Como líderes gubernamentales, empresariales y laborales, nos enfrentamos a mayores desafíos, pero hay un camino. Estoy convencida de que la iniciativa Acuerdo Global ayudará a que las futuras generaciones vivan en un mundo más integrado, dinámico, diverso y seguro.   De manera que me he comprometido, personalmente, a trabajar con otros Jefes de Estado en América Latina para promover la iniciativa y lograr un gran apoyo para su implementación.   Pueden contar con que Chile será un activo participante y promotor del Acuerdo Global.   ¡Trabajemos juntos para lograrlo!   Muchas gracias por esta oportunidad.