(Versión Original)     Dear friends:   In the last twenty-five years, Chile has successfully integrated to very competitive markets.     We are an open economy with an extensive network of trade agreements: 25 FTAs with 64 countries, accounting for 94% of Chile’s exports and over 60% of our GDP. We are the world's largest copper producer and have become important agroindustry exporters, while we are improving our infrastructure and our services industry. We have a low rate of inflation and employment and we have become a trade and investment hub in the region.     Despite a sustained effort to improve our competitiveness and our productivity, today we face new challenges. We are witnessing a global economic slowdown and a steep fall in the prices of many commodities, the centerpiece of the export strategy of most Latin American economies that has resulted in low growth and poor economic conditions across the region.   And we have some tasks to accomplish, we need to improve our present industries and develop new innovative industries. We also have to increase our productivity, integrate to global and regional value chains and continue negotiating and updating our trade agreements, including the Association Agreement with the EU, in order to create new business opportunities, while meeting the highest labor and environmental standards.   Another challenge is attracting more Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), particularly quality investment that will help to close the gaps and meet the challenges. FDI has been key to our economic success as I mentioned. And hence Chile’s competitiveness and contributing new resources as well as technological development, employment and specialized knowledge in addition around 15% of the growth of employment in Chile since 2010 is linked to the higher flows of FDI.   France is the fifth largest European Union foreign investor in Chile. With a total investment during the period of 1974–2015 of over US$1.7 billion, French companies have invested in electricity, gas and water, food and beverages, trade and chemicals. SolaireDirect, EDF Airbus, ADP Airport de Paris, Total EN, Thales Alenia, Vinci, among the most important investors in Chile.     They’re sure about our country because of our institutional stability, the responsible management of our economy, and our extensive network of free trade agreements.   Chile´s longstanding political and economic stability, its transparency and competitiveness, as well as its business prospects, position our country as an excellent destination for foreign investment in Latin America and one of the world’s leading destinations. Because of its infrastructure and connectivity, it also serves as a platform for conducting business throughout the region.   Chile values and protects foreign investments. In its World Investment Report 2015, UNCTAD ranked Chile as the world´s 11th largest recipient of foreign direct investment in 2014, with an inflow of US$23,000 million, during that year. The second biggest in Latin America after Brazil. Also, in the 2015-2016 Global Competitiveness Index published by the World Economic Forum, Chile ranked 35 out of 140 economies, ahead of all other Latin American countries.   We have recently enacted some reforms as you have seen in the video and in the words have preceded me in order to attract more foreign investment.   Our new law on Foreign Direct Investment was published on June of last year, this law replaced the previous decree, establishing guarantees for foreign investors, and providing the possibility for them to enter into new investment contracts, under similar terms and conditions as those negotiated in the past. Furthermore, this new law provides tax invariability of 44.45% for the period to up to 4 years, beginning on January 1st 2016.   This new law as you have heard created the Foreign Investment Promotion Agency –InvestChile- which we are launching internationally here today as a replacement to the Foreign Invest Committee.      InvestChile is responsible, as you saw in the video- for promoting Chile in the global market as a destination for foreign direct investment, serving as a bridge between the interests of overseas investors and business opportunities that our country offers, and providing world-class services that are in line with Chile’s economic development policies.   This visit represents an opportunity to strengthen our collaboration and I would like to extend an invitation to all companies to invest in Chile. We have thriving opportunities in mining, energy, infrastructure, tourism and the food industry, to mention a few. Our government is already developing initiatives in many of these areas, which means that we will require new private investment in key sectors of our economy.   An added incentive for investors is our full commitment to fight corruption, including new legislation.   According to the corruption perception index prepared by Transparency International, Chile scores 70, what that it means ranking 23 out of 168 countries, which is not so bad, you probably agree that this is an issue that always requires constant attention and is of particular importance in order to safeguard the legitimacy of our democracies.   Muchas gracias.     (Traducción)     Queridos amigos:   En los últimos 25 años, Chile se ha integrado con éxito a los más competitivos mercados.   Somos una economía abierta con una extensa red de acuerdos comerciales: 25 acuerdos de libre comercio con 64 países, que representan el 94% de las exportaciones de Chile y más del 60% de nuestro PIB. Somos el mayor productor de cobre del mundo y nos hemos convertido en importantes exportadores agroindustriales, mientras mejoramos nuestra infraestructura y nuestra industria de servicios. Tenemos una baja tasa de inflación y empleo, y nos hemos convertido en un centro de comercio e inversión en la región.   A pesar de un esfuerzo sostenido para mejorar nuestra competitividad y nuestra productividad, hoy en día nos enfrentamos a nuevos desafíos. Estamos en presencia de una desaceleración económica mundial y una fuerte caída de los precios de muchos commodities, la pieza central de la estrategia de exportación de la mayoría de las economías de América Latina que ha dado como resultado un bajo crecimiento y malas condiciones económicas en toda la región.   Y tenemos algunas tareas para llevar a cabo, necesitamos mejorar nuestras actuales industrias y desarrollar nuevas industrias innovadoras. También tenemos que aumentar nuestra productividad, integrarnos a las cadenas de valor mundiales y regionales y continuar la negociación y la actualización de nuestros acuerdos comerciales, incluido el Acuerdo de Asociación con la UE, con el fin de crear nuevas oportunidades de negocio, mientras damos cumplimiento a las más altas normas laborales y ambientales.   Otro desafío es atraer más inversión extranjera directa (IED), en particular inversiones de calidad que ayudarán a cerrar brechas y hacer frente a los desafíos. La IED ha sido la clave de nuestro éxito económico, como he mencionado. Y, por lo tanto, la competitividad y aportar nuevos recursos, así como el desarrollo tecnológico, empleo y conocimiento especializado, además del aproximado 15% del crecimiento del empleo en Chile desde 2010, está vinculada a los mayores flujos de IED.   Francia es el quinto mayor inversor extranjero de la Unión Europea en Chile. Con una inversión total durante el período de 1974-2015 de más de US $ 1,7 mil millones, las empresas francesas han invertido en electricidad, gas y agua, alimentos y bebidas, el comercio y los productos químicos. SolaireDirect, EDF Airbus, ADP Airport de Paris, Total EN, Thales Alenia, Vinci, están entre los más importantes inversionistas en Chile.   Ellos confían en nuestro país debido a nuestra estabilidad institucional, la gestión responsable de nuestra economía y nuestra extensa red de acuerdos de libre comercio.   La larga estabilidad política y económica de Chile, su transparencia y competitividad, así como sus perspectivas de negocio, posicionan a nuestro país como un excelente destino para la inversión extranjera en América Latina y uno de los principales destinos del mundo. Debido a su infraestructura y conectividad, también sirve como plataforma para la realización de negocios en toda la región.   Chile valora y protege las inversiones extranjeras. En su Informe Mundial de Inversiones 2015, la UNCTAD clasificó a Chile como el 11° mayor receptor mundial de inversión extranjera directa en 2014, con un flujo de entrada de US $ 23 mil millones, durante ese año. El segundo más grande de América Latina después de Brasil. Asimismo, en el Índice de Competitividad Global 2015-2016 publicado por el Foro Económico Mundial, Chile se ubicó en 35° lugar entre 140 economías, por delante de todos los demás países de América Latina.   Hemos promulgado recientemente algunas reformas, como han visto en el video y en las palabras que me han precedido, con el fin de atraer más inversión extranjera.   Nuestra nueva Ley de Inversión Extranjera Directa se publicó en junio del año pasado, y esta ley sustituye el anterior decreto, estableciendo  garantías para los inversores extranjeros, y proporcionando la posibilidad para que puedan entrar en nuevos contratos de inversión, en términos y condiciones similares a las negociadas en el pasado. Por otra parte, esta nueva ley ofrece invariabilidad tributaria del 44.45% para el período de hasta 4 años, comenzando el 1 de enero de 2016.   Esta nueva ley, como han oído, creó la Agencia de Promoción de Inversión Extranjera -InvestChile-, que estamos poniendo en marcha a nivel internacional hoy, aquí, como reemplazo para el Comité de Asuntos de Inversiones Extranjeras.   InvestChile es responsable, como se vio en el video, de la promoción de Chile en el mercado mundial como destino de inversión extranjera directa, sirviendo de puente entre los intereses de los inversores extranjeros y las oportunidades de negocio que ofrece nuestro país, además de prestar servicios de clase mundial que están en línea con las políticas de desarrollo económico de Chile.   Esta visita representa una oportunidad para fortalecer nuestra colaboración y me gustaría extender la invitación a todas las empresas a invertir en Chile. Tenemos prósperas oportunidades en minería, energía, infraestructura, turismo y la industria de alimentos, por mencionar algunos. Nuestro Gobierno ya está desarrollando iniciativas en muchas de estas áreas, lo que significa que vamos a requerir nuevas inversiones privadas en sectores clave de nuestra economía.   Un incentivo adicional para los inversores es nuestro pleno compromiso de luchar contra la corrupción, incluida la nueva legislación.   De acuerdo con el Índice de Percepción de la Corrupción elaborado por Transparencia Internacional, Chile tiene un puntaje de 70, lo que significa que está posicionado en el 23° lugar dentro de los 168 países, lo que no es tan malo, y ustedes probablemente estarán de  acuerdo en que éste es un tema que siempre requiere una atención constante y es de particular importancia para salvaguardar la legitimidad de nuestras democracias.   Muchas gracias.