(Original Speech)   Secretary General, Excellences:   It is an honor to be a part of this High Level Event of the UN LGBT Core Group, at the General Assembly.   Defending, protecting and broadening the spectrum of rights for the LGBT community is a duty that our nations must assume. Here, in the UN, we have led efforts on behalf of sexual minorities.   Fighting for LGBT rights is fighting for human rights.   Whenever a teenager is struggling in school against homophobic bullying, we must protect him.   Whenever a transgender woman is being discriminated at work because of her gender identity, our institutions must prevent and correct such discrimination.   Whenever a same-sex couple wishes to form a family, our legal system must grant that family and its members equal protection as every family.   We must fight every kind of violence, especially the brutal acts that on a daily basis pose a threat for members of the LGBT community, and many of which, remain unpunished.   But this is not an easy task, of course. Throughout history, breaking the barriers of discrimination has required governments to hear the voices of those who have been discriminated, and to lead the whole national society towards inclusion, diversity and integration.   When we talk about protecting the rights of LGBT communities, we are in fact speaking of building a more harmonious, peaceful, caring, and inclusive world, where everyone can be a part of a community that is enriched by divergence and diversity.   The central message of equality in the UN Free and Equal Campaign, launched by the Secretary General, must prevail for all human beings, and permanently inspire the work of this organization.   In Chile, the visibility of the LGBT community and the social support to the LGBT cause is a recent process. Just around 3 decades ago, the first gay activists started to protest, demanding visibilization and public health policies against AIDS.   In the recent past, several LGBT organizations have been fighting for changes, and demanding our political leaders to do something about it. Protection against discrimination, general health policies, legal recognition for same-sex couples and families and legal protection for gender identity, have been the expression of a greater fight: the fight for dignity.   Our nation has taken part in such fight. We have good news for the protection of the Human Rights and Dignity of LGBT people, even though we need to do much more:   In 2012, and due to the sad killing of a young man by homophobic aggressors that shocked our nation, our Congress passed an anti-discrimination act, which fights and creates a legal action against arbitrary discrimination based on sex, sexual orientation and gender identity, among other categories.   Also, in the last years our public health system has taken relevant steps protecting our LGBT community, adapting administrative and operative procedures to the reality and needs of LGBT people.   Last year, I had the privilege to enact the law that created the Civil Union Agreement, which allows same-sex and different-sex couples to be recognized as a family, to have a marital status and to receive public protection and benefits. As of today, 7.827 couples have celebrated this agreement.   And I know these advances are just the beginning, which is why our Senate is currently discussing a gender identity protection bill that will allow transgender people to rectify their legal identification documents through an administrative procedure, without being obligated to have medical treatments.   Also, my government has committed to submit to Congress a bill on marriage equality during the first half of 2017, and we’ll start debating on the society about this. Furthermore, it will also consider governmental support for several measures destined to strengthen the rights of the LGBT community, including reforms to the anti-discrimination laws.   We know we have multiple challenges regarding this matter. We know that we face a long road to achieve complete equality. But we are working for it.   We invite all members of the LGBT Core Group and of the UN to continue their efforts and to highlight their achievements, because when it comes to protect LGBT people, there is no step too small.   Finally, I would like to thank Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon for his important support and leadership in this cause. We trust this will also be a priority for his successor.   Thank you very much.    (Traducción)     Secretario General, Excelencias:   Es un honor ser parte de este Evento de Alto Nivel del Grupo Central de LGBT de la ONU, en la Asamblea General.   Defender, proteger y ampliar el espectro de los derechos de la comunidad LGBT es un deber que nuestras naciones deben asumir. Aquí, en las Naciones Unidas, hemos liderado esfuerzos en nombre de las minorías sexuales.     La lucha por los derechos LGBT es la lucha por los derechos humanos.   Cada vez que un adolescente tiene dificultades en la escuela contra el bullying homofóbico, debemos protegerlo.   Cada vez que una mujer transgénero está siendo discriminada en el trabajo a causa de su identidad de género, nuestras instituciones deben prevenir y corregir este tipo de discriminación.   Cada vez que una pareja del mismo sexo desee formar una familia, nuestro sistema legal debe conceder a la familia y a sus miembros la misma protección que tiene toda familia.   Debemos luchar contra todo tipo de violencia, especialmente los actos brutales que a diario suponen una amenaza para los miembros de la comunidad LGBT, y muchos de los cuales, permanecen impunes.   Pero ésta no es una tarea fácil, por supuesto. A lo largo de la historia, romper las barreras de la discriminación ha exigido a los gobiernos a escuchar las voces de los que han sido discriminados, y dirigir a toda la sociedad nacional hacia la inclusión, la diversidad y la integración.   Cuando hablamos de la protección de los derechos de las comunidades LGBT, de hecho, estamos hablando de la construcción de un mundo más armonioso, pacífico, preocupado e inclusivo, donde todos puedan ser parte de una comunidad que se enriquezca con la divergencia y la diversidad.   El mensaje central de igualdad en la Campaña Libres e Iguales de la ONU, lanzada por el Secretario General, debe prevalecer para todos los seres humanos e inspirar de forma permanente el trabajo de esta organización.   En Chile, la visibilidad de la comunidad LGBT y el apoyo social a la causa LGBT es un proceso reciente. Hace sólo 3 décadas, los primeros activistas homosexuales comenzaron a protestar, exigiendo políticas de visibilización y de salud pública contra el SIDA.   En el pasado reciente, varias organizaciones LGBT han estado luchando por los cambios, y exigiendo a nuestros líderes políticos que hagan algo al respecto. La protección contra la discriminación, las políticas generales de salud, el reconocimiento legal de las parejas y las familias del mismo sexo y la protección legal de la identidad de género, han sido la expresión de una lucha mayor: la lucha por la dignidad.   Nuestra nación ha tomado parte en dicha lucha. Tenemos buenas noticias para la protección de los derechos humanos y la dignidad de las personas LGBT, aunque necesitamos hacer mucho más:   En 2012, y debido a la triste muerte de un joven por agresores homofóbicos, que sacudió nuestra nación, nuestro Congreso aprobó una ley contra la discriminación, que lucha y crea una acción legal contra la discriminación arbitraria por razón de sexo, orientación sexual e identidad de género, entre otras categorías.   Además, en los últimos años, nuestro sistema de salud pública ha tomado las medidas pertinentes que protegen a nuestra comunidad LGBT, adaptando los procedimientos administrativos y operativos a la realidad y necesidades de las personas LGBT.   El año pasado, tuve el privilegio de promulgar la ley que creó el Acuerdo de Unión Civil, que permite a personas del mismo sexo y las parejas de distinto sexo ser reconocidos como una familia, tener un estado civil y recibir protección pública y beneficios. A la fecha, 7.827 parejas han celebrado este acuerdo.   Y sé que estos avances son sólo el principio, por lo que nuestro Senado está debatiendo un proyecto de Ley de Protección de Identidad de Género, que permitirá a las personas transgénero rectificar sus documentos de identificación legal a través de un procedimiento administrativo, sin estar obligado a tener tratamientos médicos.   Además, mi Gobierno se ha comprometido a presentar al Congreso un proyecto de Ley sobre la Igualdad del Matrimonio durante la primera mitad de 2017, e iniciaremos el debate social al respecto. Por otra parte, también se considerará el apoyo gubernamental para una serie de medidas destinadas a reforzar los derechos de la comunidad LGBT, incluyendo reformas a las leyes contra la discriminación.   Sabemos que tenemos varios desafíos con respecto a este asunto. Sabemos que nos enfrentamos a un largo camino para alcanzar la igualdad completa. Pero estamos trabajando para ello.   Instamos a todos los miembros del Grupo Central LGBT y de las Naciones Unidas a que continúen sus esfuerzos y destaquen sus logros, porque cuando se trata de proteger a las personas LGBT, no hay paso demasiado pequeño.   Por último, me gustaría agradecer al Secretario General Ban Ki-Moon, por su importante apoyo y liderazgo en esta causa. Confiamos en que esto también será una prioridad para su sucesor.   Muchas gracias.