(Versión original)    As Prime Minister Stefan Lövfen has mentioned, we have had –of course also our delegations- a very interesting and productive meeting.   First, I would like to thank you, Prime Minister, for the warm welcome we have received in this first state visit to Sweden. The visit reflects the importance that Sweden has for Chile and the views that we share regarding issues of great importance for both countries but also for the world today.   We have reaffirmed that we are like minded countries and the topics we have discussed with Prime Minister Lövfen, like those that are at the core of this visit, clearly express this common ground.   We have signed many bilateral instruments, among them some of special importance, I’m not going to mention all of these, because Prime Minister already mentioned them, but some of them are of an especial importance for the future of our bilateral relation.   For instance, the Memorandum of Understanding on Social Welfare will allow Chile to better understand the successful Swedish experience in the formulation and implementation of public policy in areas such as public health, gender equality, child and adolescent protection, support of the elderly, or prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, for example, in the use of drugs, alcohol and tobacco.   Public policies focused on diminishing social gaps are of great importance to my country and in our strategy to deal with the inequalities that impede our full development.   We certainly thank Sweden for their willingness to share their extensive experience in this subject.   We have also signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Corporate Social Responsibility and Memorandum of Understanding in the area of Sustainability that address subjects as varied as Green Technologies, Urban Development, Mining and Forestry. But also, the Working Holiday Agreement will create opportunities –as Prime Minister mentioned- for young people of both countries and bring us closer together.   And tomorrow, in the meeting and Forum on Enterprise and Economy our ministers of Transportation will sign a Letter of Agreement to start to working on the issue of electric buses, in where you have a lot of experience and that it’s very important for the fight against pollution and climate change.   We also have important work ahead of us in terms of trade and investment. Swedish investment in Chile can grow and diversify, and our export sector has a lot to explore in Sweden, including in the area of organic products -including wine, of course- and berries and nuts.  There also many opportunities in trade in services.   There are many areas where we can complement and support each other to promote sustainable development, and I have expressed Prime Minister Lövfen our hope of having Sweden’s support to modernize the Association Agreement between Chile and the European Union.   The content and projection of the bilateral relation between Chile and Sweden, has great depth and variety. Tomorrow I will join the Prime Minister in the Global Deal Social Dialogue, his initiative and one of great interest to my country and for the world. We need to promote a constructive dialogue between counterparts in the labor market and governments, to improve productivity and to make the aspiration of decent work a reality.   Of course, we have to thank to Prime Minister –and of course, to the Kingdom too- all the support that Sweden gave to Chileans and so many Chileans are living here still and even being an important part of the Swedish society. You even have I think people in the Parliament, people in local government, in many places. So we want to thank for that, for all the support to our people.   And we want also, during this visit, to make a special recognition of two exceptional men: Primer Minister Olof Palme and the Ambassador in Chile during the beginning of the dictatorship, Harald Edelstamm, because they personify the solidarity –as I mentioned- that thousands of our people received at a very difficult time, where one gesture was enough to save a life in danger. Chile will never stop being grateful for that helpful hand. We will always carry it in our hearts.   Thank you very much.     *****     (Traducción)    Como el Primer Ministro Stefan Lövfen ha mencionado, hemos sostenido –y por supuesto, nuestras delegaciones-  una reunión muy interesante y productiva.   En primer lugar, me gustaría agradecerle, Primer Ministro, la calurosa bienvenida que hemos recibido en esta primera Visita de Estado a Suecia. La visita refleja la importancia que Suecia tiene respecto a Chile y los puntos de vista que compartimos en relación a temas de gran importancia para ambos países, pero también para el mundo de hoy.   Hemos reafirmado que somos países que tienen similares perspectivas, y los temas que hemos discutido con el Primer Ministro Lövfen, como los que están en el centro de esta visita, expresan claramente esa base común.   Hemos firmado muchos instrumentos bilaterales, entre ellos algunos de especial importancia, no los voy a mencionar todos, porque el Primer Ministro ya los mencionó, pero algunos de ellos son de especial importancia para el futuro de nuestra relación bilateral.   Por ejemplo, el Memorando de Entendimiento sobre Bienestar Social, que permitirá a Chile comprender mejor la exitosa experiencia de Suecia en la formulación e implementación de políticas públicas en áreas como la salud pública, la igualdad de género, protección infantil y adolescente, el apoyo a las personas mayores o la prevención, tratamiento y rehabilitación, por ejemplo, en el uso de drogas, alcohol y tabaco.    Las políticas públicas orientadas a la disminución de las brechas sociales son de gran importancia para mi país y en nuestra estrategia para hacer frente a las desigualdades que impiden nuestro completo desarrollo.   Desde luego, agradecemos a Suecia por su disposición a compartir su amplia experiencia en este tema.   También, hemos firmado un Memorando de Entendimiento sobre la Responsabilidad Social de las Empresas y un Memorando de Entendimiento en el Ámbito de la Sostenibilidad, que tratan temas tan variados como las tecnologías verdes, y el desarrollo urbano, minero y forestal. Además, el Acuerdo de Working Holiday creará oportunidades –como mencionó el Primer Ministro- para los jóvenes de ambos países y nos acercarán.   Y mañana, en la reunión y en el Foro Empresarial y Económico, nuestros ministros de Transporte firmarán una Carta de Acuerdo para comenzar a trabajar en el tema de los autobuses eléctricos, en donde ustedes tienen mucha experiencia y que es importante para combatir la contaminación y el cambio climático.   También tenemos por delante una importante labor en términos de comercio e inversión. La inversión sueca en Chile puede crecer y diversificarse, y nuestro sector exportador tiene mucho que explorar en Suecia, incluso en el ámbito de los productos orgánicos -incluyendo el vino, por supuesto- las berries y los frutos secos. También, hay muchas oportunidades en el comercio de servicios.   Hay muchas áreas en las que podemos complementarnos y apoyarnos mutuamente para promover el desarrollo sostenible, y he expresado al Primer Ministro Lövfen nuestra esperanza de contar con el apoyo de Suecia para modernizar el Acuerdo de Asociación entre Chile y la Unión Europea.   El contenido y la proyección de la relación bilateral entre Chile y Suecia tienen una gran profundidad y variedad. Mañana, voy a unirme al Primer Ministro en el “Diálogo Social y Acuerdo Global”, iniciativa suya y uno de los principales intereses para mi país y para el mundo. Debemos promover un diálogo constructivo entre las contrapartes en el mercado laboral y los gobiernos, para mejorar la productividad y hacer de la aspiración al trabajo digno, una realidad.   Por supuesto, tenemos que agradecer al Primer Ministro –y desde luego, al Reino también- todo el apoyo que Suecia le dio a los chilenos, y que muchos chilenos siguen viviendo aún y siendo parte importante de la sociedad sueca. Incluso, ustedes tienen, creo, gente en el Parlamento, en el Gobierno local, en varios lugares. Así que, queremos agradecer ello, todo el apoyo para nuestra gente.   Y también queremos, durante esta visita, hacer un especial reconocimiento a dos hombres excepcionales: el Primer Ministro Olof Palme y el embajador en Chile durante el inicio de la dictadura, Harald Edelstamm, porque ellos personifican la solidaridad –como mencioné-que recibieron miles de nuestros compatriotas en un momento muy difícil, donde un gesto fue suficiente para salvar una vida en peligro. Chile nunca dejará de agradecer esa mano servicial. Siempre lo vamos a llevar en nuestros corazones.   Muchas gracias.