(Original Speech)     Dear Friends:   It is sobering to be here after four decades since evil and horror came to this place to cut short the lives of Orlando Letelier and Ronnie Moffit.   It is sobering because as the United States, in September Chile also has painful memories and wounds that do not heal.   But it is moving to see that the memory of Orlando Letelier remains among us, in this city that was his home and where he found allies, friends, and comrades, who still remember and honor him, as you have done in this place for the last forty years.   It is also touching because the figure of Orlando has continued growing in these forty years because he was an example of dignity, loyalty and braveness. Because his voice was never afraid of tyranny nor death, or to defend those who suffered political and economic hardship at the hands of dictatorship.   Orlando Letelier was not only an example. He was a symbol of resistance. The spirit of a democrat with a never wavering vocation to confront authoritarism, hatred and abuse.   A symbol of someone who honors his homeland and fellow citizens, but also all humanity.   Just as Orlando Letelier was born Chilean, lived Chilean and died Chilean -as he said days before his murder- it is also true that he was a world citizen.   A man who knew how to understand the struggles and hopes of different peoples and always searched for peace, social change, and absolute defense of democracy.   His capacity to bring people together, his leadership and moral estature were precisely what the dictatorship feared most.  These qualities have raised him beyond his death and above the cowardice of his murderers.   That is why we are gathered here. As Orlando Letelier said more than forty years ago when referring to Salvador Allende: “We are not here today only to commemorate the death of a great hero of our country, but also to project his message into the future”.   He did not know it then, but today we perceive the clarity of his message, his values and his voice that have projected and grown with the passing of time.   If Orlando Letelier was a symbol of struggle during his life, his image has become a symbol of the search for truth, reparation and justice.   The trial against the perpetrators of the murder of Orlando Letelier and Ronny Moffit is a symbol that justice is possible against those who make crime a State Policy.   The search for truth in the case of Orlando and Ronny has also become a symbol of fraternal solidarity between United States and Chile. A wound that hurts deeply, but at the same time has made us stronger in our conviction that crimes like this must never happen again.   Thank you so much the Secretary for the possibility of having new declassified documents that we hope it will permit us to move forward in terms of truth and justice.      Orlando Letelier represents the certainty of triumph: memory over oblivion; democracy over violence; justice over impunity.   And it is this victory that we commemorate today and for which we raise our voices as Orlando and Ronni always knew how to raise his voice for the most significant and just causes.   Thank you very much.    (Traducción)     Queridos amigos:   Es estremecedor estar aquí, aun cuando han pasado cuatro décadas desde que la garra de la infamia y el horror llegara hasta este lugar para acabar con la vida de Orlando Letelier y de Ronni Moffit.   Es estremecedor porque, tal como Estados Unidos, Chile tiene cada septiembre recuerdos dolorosos y heridos que tardan en cerrar.   Pero es también emocionante, porque puedo ver que la huella de Orlando Letelier permanece entre nosotros, en esta ciudad que fue también su hogar y donde encontró aliados, amigos y compañeros que todavía lo recuerdan y honran, como lo han hecho ustedes en este lugar durante los últimos 40 años.     Es emocionante porque la figura de Orlando ha seguido creciendo en estos 40 años porque él fue un ejemplo de dignidad, lealtad y valentía. Porque su voz nunca temió a la tiranía ni a la muerte, ni a defender a aquellos que sufrían violencia política y económica, a manos de la dictadura.   Orlando Letelier no fue sólo un ejemplo, fue un símbolo de la resistencia. El espíritu de un demócrata con una vocación que nunca flaquea, para confrontar el autoritarismo, el odio y el abuso.   Un símbolo de quien honra a su patria y sus semejantes, pero también a toda la humanidad.   Porque así como Orlando Letelier nació chileno, vivió chileno y murió chileno – como dijo él mismo, días antes de su asesinato – también es cierto que fue un ciudadano universal.   Un hombre que supo comprender las luchas y anhelos de diversos pueblos, y que siempre buscó la paz, el cambio social y la defensa irrestricta de la democracia.   Fue esa capacidad de convocatoria, ese liderazgo y esa estatura moral, precisamente, lo que tanto miedo generaba en los artífices de la dictadura. Y son esas características las que lo elevarán por siempre, mucho más allá de su muerte y de la pequeñez de sus asesinos.   Por eso estamos aquí. Tal como dijo Orlando Letelier hace más de 40 años al hablar de Salvador Allende: "No estamos aquí hoy en día sólo para conmemorar la muerte de un gran héroe de nuestro país, sino también para proyectar su mensaje en el futuro".   Él no lo sabía en esa época, pero hoy vemos con claridad que su mensaje, sus valores y su voz han sabido proyectarse y agrandarse en el tiempo.   Y si Orlando Letelier fue un símbolo de lucha en vida, también su imagen ha sido un símbolo en la búsqueda de la verdad, la reparación y la justicia.   El juicio contra los autores del asesinato de Orlando Letelier y Ronni Moffit es un símbolo de que es posible hacer justicia contra quienes hacen del crimen, una política de Estado.   Y porque la búsqueda de la verdad sobre lo ocurrido a Orlando y Ronni ha sido también un símbolo de solidaridad fraterna entre Estados Unidos y Chile. Una herida que duele mucho, pero que, al mismo tiempo, nos ha hecho más fuertes en nuestra certeza de que actos criminales como éste, nunca más pueden repetirse.   Muchas gracias a la Secretaría por la posibilidad de tener nuevos documentos desclasificados, que esperamos nos permitan avanzar en términos de verdad y justicia.   Orlando Letelier representa la certeza de un triunfo: la del recuerdo sobre el olvido, de la democracia sobre la violencia, de la justicia sobre la impunidad.   Y ése es el triunfo que conmemoramos hoy y por el que alzamos nuestras voces, tal como Orlando y Ronni siempre supieron alzar su voz por las causas más nobles y justas.   Muchas gracias.