(Versión original)   Ladies and gentleman:  I wish to thank Canning House for this invitation. I´m pleased to be present at this forum, which has defined as its goal the “UK’s leading forum for informed comment, contacts and debate on Latin American politics, economy and business”. I am certain that the debates and topics discussed here impact the views of people in Britain and throughout Europe and the world.  I would like to take this chance to address the challenges that Chile and Latin America face today and how we, both individually, but more importantly, together can raise our voice, so that it can be heard by all.  Let me speak about the challenges.  At the return to democracy twenty-five years ago, political and economic integration into the Americas and, internationally, was fundamental for Chile. One of our main objectives was to complement the ongoing unilateral opening of the economy, through the negotiation of bilateral, regional and multilateral trade agreements, allowing all Chileans to benefit from the results.  Thus, along with the reforms to restore human rights and the rule of law, and the tax and labor changes implemented in the early 1990s, we began to aggressively negotiate trade agreements with clear rules and disciplines that created new trade and investment opportunities, generating jobs and economic growth. These trade agreements became possible only because of the restoration of democracy.  Since then, Chile has successfully integrated into the global economy, diversifying its export offer and markets. Today, we have 25 free trade agreements with 64 partners, and more than 60% of our GDP is linked to trade. And we are negotiating two more, so I hope that we are going in the right direction. In parallel, we have become active participants of regional integration initiatives such as APEC, the Pacific Alliance and TPP, are associate members of MERCOSUR, as well as constructive members of organizations as the WTO and the OECD.  We have also worked closely with countries in our region to give a new impetus to political integration schemes such as the Union of South American States (UNASUR) and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) and have actively sought new ties with subregional bodies such as the Central American Integration System (SICA in Spanish) and CARICOM. All the while, Chile has actively supported the UN system and the InterAmerican one.  Thanks to sustained economic growth in the last three decades, we have been able to decrease our poverty rate from 39% in 1990 to 8% in 2015, and have reached a PPP income of US$23,000, the highest in the region. We have improved our infrastructure, become an important agroindustry exporter, developed our services industry, have continually improved and updated our customs procedures and standards, and become a trade and investment hub in the region.  The story is not much different in our region. Latin America lived through a process in democratization and economic growth in the eighties and nineties. Recently, we have seen important political changes in countries in our region as result of elections in Argentina and Venezuela and in the referendum in Bolivia. In Peru we will also see changes in the context of the next Presidential election. Our countries have been able to maintain one of democracy’s basic tenets: the alternation in power through elections.  Nonetheless, today Chile and our region face new challenges. With greater institutional maturity and prosperity, citizens are increasing their demands for more equal societies, for a greater voice in the making of decisions that affect their daily lives and for more democratic and transparent political systems. We must reduce inequality at home and create opportunities for all our citizens.   In addition, the international economic downturn we are experiencing is a clear sign to all that we must stop depending on commodity exports and their volatile prices. Today, we need to add value to our products, integrate regional and global value chains and participate more fully in the knowledge-intensive society. Adopting the right measures to increase productivity and competiveness at home is one way to achieve this, which is complemented by boosting trade and investment among ourselves and with other regional blocs through economic integration schemes.  Finally, there are global challenges, such as climate change, conflicts within countries and among countries and non-state actors, and increasing migratory flows, which have a greater impact on women, children and the elderly, on the most vulnerable one.  But there are still significant pockets of poverty in the region. The gaps between rich and poor have deepened, and ours is the most unequal region in the world.   Let me give you some examples:  Despite the important reduction of poverty experienced by the region in recent decades, 165 million people remain poor. This is 3 out of 10 people and 69 million, who live in extreme poverty. And there is a fact, which is particularly troubling: high child poverty. ECLAC estimated that there are 70.5 million children and adolescents, who live in poverty in the region. That is: 4 out of 10. This is an urgent wake up call, because we must be aware that this reality, which foresees an unpromising future for these children, places a question mark over the future of Latin America.  On the other hand, with regard to economic inequality, we see that the bottom income quintile of households receive up 5.6% of total revenues, while the richest quintile is left with 46.7%.  Sadly this is a trend that is becoming more acute, and not just in our continent. You know probably the study that last year of OXFAM, on a 1% of the planet's richest owns 48% of the wealth, and it is expected that this figure will reach 54% in 2019.  And if we look closely, it is even more dramatic: today, 80 of the world's richest people possess the same portion of the cake than 3.6 billion of poor women and men. No one can say that this state of affairs is fair.  In terms of the inequality of access to services, we can mention- for example - that 4 of every 10 families have no roof to live under or live in poor quality housing. This percentage exceeds 70 per cent in countries such as Nicaragua, Bolivia and Peru.  Meanwhile, 33 percent of the region's rural population lacks basic sanitation services, and 36% does not have safe drinking water.  Why do I mention this? Because all this shows that even though the region has made some advances –and important advances- we are still far from the society that we crave, and that the time for action, the "enabling environment", if I may say, is now.  To revert these gaps and move towards the construction of a better society entails combating poverty and exclusion, creating conditions for equality, and opening spaces for diversity. And that´s what we are doing.  So let me speak a bite about Chile and the Reforms.   In Chile we are building consensus and putting lots of energy on the generation of equality of rights and opportunities, and equity and inclusion in different fronts, such as taxation, education, labor, politics, childhood and youth and gender, the civil union pact for same sex couples, among others.  The focus is squarely put on equality and cohesion and that is why in my country is carrying out reforms aimed at reducing inequalities and social segregation, because we understand that it will permit to expand rights and opportunities for everyone.  We are making great efforts to close social gaps and prevent segments of the population from being left behind and integrating the excluded.  Our purpose - as I have said on other occasions - is two-fold. We want all citizens, independent of their social, political, cultural, sexual, or geographical condition, to develop their potential and have a good life. And, on the other hand, we also want each and every one of them to contribute to the common development of the country. I think it is just thing to do but it also the smart thing to do.  We seek, in short, to develop personal skills and collective strengths, and the various reforms we are implementing all point in that direction.  For example, we carried out a tax reform, the largest of its kind in the last 30 years, which sparked great discussions and disputes, but which finally received overwhelming support in our Congress. It is a reform that will allow us to share the burden in a more equitable and fairer manner, so that those who have more, contribute more.  Fully 73% of the additional tax revenue come from the 0.1% of the richest members of society. And this reform ensures permanent financing for those transformations, especially in education and social protection, which we promised and which were supported by our citizens.  We are also carrying forward significant policy reforms, essentially those that will lead to a more democratic, transparent and political system.  We replaced the binominal electoral system, inherited from the dictatorship.  The new electoral system will allow us to have a more representative and legitimate democracy, in which each vote is worth what it truly deserves, where there is more competition and better territorial equity in the representation criteria.  Along with this, we have moved towards gender equality with a quota system, which establishes that, from now on, at least 40% of a party´s candidate roster must be female. And it was very difficult to get, I tried to do it in my first government and I could not get it, because we know in Chile we have a popular said –it is not very nice, but it is a popular said- “made the law, made the trap”. So we decided in order to avoid it, to achieve this, to have two requirements: every party that inscribe its list, it has to have 40% of candidates otherwise it cannot inscribe it. And the second, the party that elects more women, it will receive financing support from State.  Because in Chile, we believe that while women, who constitute more than 50% of the population in my country, remain underrepresented in Congress and the Executive, democracy will not be truly representative.  For this reason, and because we are confident that women´s contributions are fundamental to economic and social progress, we have given priority to the work for gender equality.  We have strengthened the institutionally and promote and guarantee the rights of all women. We have also promoted other policies aimed at safeguarding such basic principles, as the right to life free of violence, with liberty and security.  For example, to protect victims of violence, which in Chile causes around 40 femicides per year, we are doubling the number of safe houses for women, with or without their children, when they are threatened by violence. And we will increase by 25% the number of Centers that deliver support and timely assistance to women who need it. But if we talk about policies that promote equality, the most important of them is currently focused on education.  This is a particularly relevant topic - and so we understood it very early on, because it is in this area that the hopes of the younger generations and their families are placed, and therein resides the future of the nation, its ability to progress, to have cohesion and democratization. But it is also the key for ensuring a sustainable economy with higher levels of productivity and that’s one of the issues that we are working on very strongly.    Only through education can we deliver the essential tools for the full development of each individual, prepare children and young people for life in society and strengthen the foundations of democracy.  Thus, schools must be a space for learning, integration, understanding differences, promoting civic equality and for contact with the democratic experience.  Although in recent decades, we have advanced significantly in coverage and access to education, we have a serious deficit in quality, especially in the poorest sectors. So we have highly segregated systems that not only are not conducive to integration but also reproduce and widen social inequalities.  This has deeply damaged the social mobility, has contributed to widening gaps and, in consequence, prevented Chileans from sharing a vision of the country, to recognize each other in a context broader than their own live in diversity and build channels of cooperation.  So, I would say that it does not contribute to the construction of an inclusive and democratic country that we seek.  These are just some of the shortcomings of our educational system that we are already correcting. We have enacted a law which ends with the practice that families must pay a part of the monthly payment in private schools that receive public funding. In addition, it eliminates the selection process and profit in all primary and secondary schools, which receive public funds. In the medium term, our goal is that all schools achieve equivalent levels of excellence and inclusion, and become the cornerstone of the Chile that we all dream about.  There are other measures, such as free higher education, which we will begin to implement next year. We seek to ensure that education –we are not talking about any education, we are talking about quality education- at all levels, stops being a consumer good, dependent on families to pay and becomes as a social right that ensures access but particularly quality for everyone and is a generator of opportunities and social mobility.  But because the quality must remain having an important role in teachers and leadership at schools, we also have approved a law that improving teachers’ salaries and labor conditions but also asking them, demanding from them better performances.  We are also in the process of implementing other reforms, including the vote of Chileans abroad and a recently launched participative process to discuss which are the values and principles that we want to see or reflect on our Constitution, which are the duties and also the rights of the people and that reflects on the new Constitution and how we see the different institutions of the country, political institutions, all kind of institutions in terms of if we believe that the way Chile is organized is the best way or if there’s something that should be changed.  These reforms will allow us to reaffirm and strengthen our vocation for democracy, economic openness, growth and trade, with a long term outlook.  Maybe I should tell you that it is not my intention to change the Constitution, so President can be elected once, once and once again, to tell you that’s not my kind of Constitution. It is not as tailor one, it is the one that will represent the people of Chile.   About Regional Integration, how to address the global economic slowdown and ensure that we move away from the low growth that has become the norm?  One answer in Chile’s view is regional integration. It is from Latin America and the Caribbean that we speak to the world, and we strive to present common views that reflect our realities.  We acknowledge that there are diverse political and economic perspectives on how to advance to development within the region, but do not see this as an impediment to seek common views, since there are coinciding interests within our region. It is feasible to move towards regional integration on issues such as connectivity, movement of people and trade facilitation.  Latin America has rich resources and markets for services and products with added value, and great investment opportunities. Blocs negotiate at the world level these days, and this is why we must pursue regional integration. We can be a better platform for world trade if we act together.  Chile has a vocation as a bridge between the Pacific and the Atlantic, and among diverse economies, cultures and political traditions. Thus, along with our network of bilateral agreements, we are seeking a closer understanding between the two main trade blocs, the Pacific Alliance and MERCOSUR, not to merge the two but to agree on a common action plan, which might allow us to reap more political and economic advantages, each one at its own pace. This is what we call “convergence in diversity.”  The Pacific Alliance is one such initiative. It is more than a trade agreement, it is a new way of looking at trading blocs, focusing on connectivity and genuine integration, which benefits all of our citizens. Within the Alliance we are building bridges by sponsoring visa-free travel, educational exchanges and active cooperation schemes.  In the case of the four members of the Alliance (Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru), we are among the most dynamic in the Americas, with average GDP growth of 3.3 percent over 2011–13, surpassing the overall GDP growth of 2.7 percent in Latin America, in the same period. In addition, Pacific Alliance exports increased an average of 3.5 percent, compared with invariable export rates in other parts of the region.  On the financial side, we have created a Latin America Stock Market, known as MILA, integrating the stock exchanges of Colombia, Peru and Chile. Mexico recently became a party to this initiative, because they needed to change some legislation to be able to do it. The joint capitalization of the four stock exchanges tops US$1.25 trillion, compared to the US$1.22 trillion Sao Paulo Stock Market, the second biggest of the region.  In late June-early July, we will host the Presidential Summit of the Pacific Alliance, taking over the Presidency Pro Tempore of the Alliance for a year. Among other tasks, our emphasis will be taking full advantage on the new Trade Agreement, on strengthening ties with the 42 observer states?—?including the UK—?the incorporation of SMEs to the Business Council and the establishment of a public-private agenda on innovation issues.  Along this same line, progress has been made with regard to bi-oceanic corridors, a pending infrastructure challenge to better connect both shores of South America. Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay signed an agreement in late 2015 to make these corridors a priority for the short term.  In the area of investments, Chile has deep ties to countries in both the Atlantic and Pacific shores. Between 1990 and 2014, Chile has invested more than 25 billion dollars in Brazil and almost 17 billion in Argentina. Meanwhile, Chilean investments in countries that are members of the Pacific Alliance are 17.5 billion dollars in Colombia and 14.5 billion dollars in Peru.  These are the bricks on which to build a stronger regional integration. We are aware of our region’s diversity, but we must be able to also identify what unites us and how we can integrate our ideas, our perspectives, and how to engage with other emerging powers as well as old allies.   The TPP is one such arrangement. It was signed on February 4th, 2016, after a five-year negotiation. For Chile’s economy, the TPP presents benefits in market access which will allow the diversification of our exports; moreover, the new accumulation of origin mechanism will facilitate our integration with the regional and global value chains.   The TPP presents clear advantages for global development with the establishment of trade rules with, if I may say, 21st century standards and we are certain that this agreement will be the blueprint for all future trade agreements.  The Chilean government has held numerous public consultations and will send the TPP Agreement to Congress for its approval during probable the second semester of this year. We aim to have a broad and democratic debate, which will take into account the different points of view present in our society. We are aware that probably there will be opposition, but are convinced that the benefits of this Agreement outweigh the costs.  We value the bi- regional dialogue between CELAC and the EU. Chile is committed to develop a role as an articulator of consensus in all the process of analysis that the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of CELAC and EU will do in October in Dominican Republic. The objective is to enhance a concrete political dialogue in the areas that both parties agree in the common action plan CELAC-EU.  Finally, I want to emphasize the relevance of the Association Agreement with the EU for Chile´s development. We are keen on modernizing this agreement and its pillars:  political, trade and cooperation for development. So, I should not get into internal domestic things, but it will be great if we could count with the UK´s support in the UE, so we can really approve, approve this modernization of our trade agreement. So we hope to count on with your support for the launching of negotiations at the end of the year.  Talking about Global governance, Chile also contributes to global governance in some key issues, such as climate change, the Oceans, Human Rights, Agenda 2030 and peacekeeping.  Progress has been made through close interaction within the region and multilaterally.  There is much left to be done and we are certain that along with likeminded friends, like the UK, we will continue to move forward.   At COP 21 we adopted a legally binding agreement that establishes a comprehensive action plan to avoid the dangers of climate change by limiting global warming below 2° C. Chile is one of the countries most affected by climate change. In March 2015, the Antarctic Peninsula registered the highest temperature since official records are kept: 17.5 Celsius. Three days later in northern Chile, in the Atacama Desert, it rained in one day the equivalent of 14 years, causing a massive natural disaster that left huge material and human losses.  This is why we are interested in the idea of holding a Summit of the most vulnerable countries in the world, so as to exchange experiences, learn good practices and make concrete proposals. Many of those are within the region, which has suffered a number of natural disasters in the last few years, most linked to climate change.  This phenomenon is not abstract, it has real consequences that affect our citizens and, as such, it´s a challenge for foreign policy.  In this context, last October we hosted the second “Our Ocean” Conference in Valparaíso. This US-Chilean initiative seeks to promote conservation and sustainability of our Ocean as an instrument to control climate change. At the Conference, delegates made numerous commitments, including the establishment of marine protected areas, and allowed for the creation of new alliances between nation States and non-governmental actors.  The participation of civil society, including important NGOs such as Oceana, WWF or National Geographic were fundamental for the success of this initiative, which will hold its third version in Washington this fall.  A major issue relevant for global governance is the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals, agreed upon in September last year in New York, with Chile ´s active support. The 17 ODS make up an integrated and indivisible whole of the three sustainable development pillars: economic, social and environmental. Since January, Chile is a newly-elected member of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). Our priority will be inclusive development and the implementation of a monitoring mechanism for the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs.  We will also be a voice for the middle income countries of our region.  In the area of human rights, I want to highlight our strong support the UN Guiding Principles on Human Rights and Business, which have broad international consensus. They give clear guidance to States and businesses on the protection and respect of human rights. We are working on the national implementation of these principles through the development of a National Action Plan, which will address matters such as workplace discrimination, respect for communities, production chains, child labor, corruption, labor rights and respect for the environment. This agenda urges companies to identify and address the potential impacts on those rights, and thus prevent conflicts between companies and their environment.  We are grateful to the UK for the collaboration they have given us on this issue.  As a responsible actor in global affairs, Chile has actively engaged in peacekeeping operations.  Haiti is the most important one, where Chile represents a large portion of the 75% of peacekeepers that come from Latin America.  In parallel, we have also contributed to the process of political stabilization, through the strengthening of public policies and institutions. The experience of working closely with other Latin American countries in this mission has been rewarding and has led to the establishment of a bilateral combined force with Argentina, the Southern Cross, for peacekeeping purposes.   Once peace is signed in Colombia, we will be there as part of this peace-process as guarantors. We will be there as part of a political mission to support the implementation of the peace.  Dear friends:  I know it is very hot here and I am finishing really.  I have addressed some of the issues of the present and the future that represent challenges for our Chile and the region. We need to find answers and new ways to solve these national, regional and global challenges of the 21st century, so that we can continue to move toward sustainable development. It won´t be easy. But we have no rational option but to work with each other to build the new international structures for the new realities.  Thank you very much.   *****     (Traducción)    Damas y caballeros:  Deseo agradecer a Canning House por esta invitación. Me complace estar presente en este Foro, que se ha definido como meta ser "el principal Foro del Reino Unido para comentarios informados, contactos y debate sobre política, economía y negocios de América Latina”. Estoy segura de que los debates y los temas discutidos aquí impactan en los puntos de vista de la gente en Gran Bretaña, y en toda Europa y el mundo.  Me gustaría aprovechar esta oportunidad para abordar los desafíos que Chile y América Latina enfrentan en la actualidad y cómo, tanto a nivel individual, pero lo más importante, juntos, podemos elevar nuestra voz, de modo que pueda ser oída por todos.  Permítanme hablar sobre los desafíos.  En el retorno a la democracia hace veinticinco años, la integración política y económica en el continente americano y, a nivel internacional, fue fundamental para Chile. Uno de nuestros principales objetivos era complementar la continua apertura unilateral de la economía, mediante la negociación de acuerdos comerciales bilaterales, regionales y multilaterales, permitiendo a todos los chilenos beneficiarse de los resultados.    De esta forma, junto con las reformas para restaurar los derechos humanos y el Estado de Derecho, y los cambios tributarios y laborales implementados en la década de 1990, comenzamos a negociar agresivamente acuerdos comerciales con reglas y disciplinas que crearan nuevas oportunidades comerciales y de inversión, generando empleo y crecimiento económico. Estos acuerdos comerciales sólo fueron posibles debido a la restauración de la democracia.  Desde entonces, Chile se ha integrado con éxito en la economía global, diversificando su oferta y mercados de exportación. Hoy en día, contamos con 25 acuerdos de libre comercio con 64 socios y más del 60% de nuestro PIB está vinculado al comercio. Y estamos negociando dos más, así que tengo la esperanza de que estamos yendo en la dirección correcta. Paralelamente, nos hemos convertido en participantes activos de iniciativas regionales de integración como la APEC, la Alianza del Pacífico y el TPP, somos miembros asociados del MERCOSUR así como miembros constructivos de organizaciones como la OMC y la OCDE.  También hemos trabajado estrechamente con los países de nuestra región para dar un nuevo impulso a esquemas de integración política, como la Unión de los Estados de América del Sur (UNASUR) y la Comunidad de Estados de América Latina y el Caribe (CELAC), y hemos buscado activamente nuevos lazos con organismos subregionales como el Sistema de Integración Centroamericana (SICA en español) y la CARICOM. Al mismo tiempo, Chile ha apoyado activamente el sistema de la ONU y la Inter-Americana.  Gracias a un crecimiento económico sostenido en las últimas tres décadas, hemos sido capaces de disminuir nuestra tasa de pobreza del 39% en 1990 al 8% en 2015, llegando a un ingreso de PPA (Paridad de Poder Adquisitivo) de US$ 23.000, el más alto de la región. Hemos mejorado nuestra infraestructura, nos hemos convertido en un importante exportador agroindustrial, hemos desarrollado nuestra industria de servicios, hemos mejorado continuamente y actualizado nuestros procedimientos y normas aduaneras, y nos hemos convertido en un centro de comercio e inversión en la región.  La historia no es muy diferente en nuestra región. América Latina atravesó un proceso de democratización y crecimiento económico en los años ochenta y noventa. Recientemente, hemos visto cambios políticos importantes en los países de nuestra región como resultado de las elecciones en Argentina y Venezuela, y en el Referéndum en Bolivia. En Perú, hemos observado cambios en el contexto de la próxima elección presidencial. Nuestros países han podido mantener uno de los principios básicos de la democracia: la alternancia en el poder a través de elecciones.  No obstante, hoy Chile y nuestra región se enfrentan a nuevos desafíos. Con una mayor madurez institucional y prosperidad, los ciudadanos están incrementando sus demandas de sociedades más equitativas, por una mayor voz en la toma de decisiones que afecten sus vidas diarias y por un sistema político más democrático y transparente. Hay que reducir la desigualdad en el país y crear oportunidades para todos nuestros ciudadanos.  Además, la crisis económica internacional que estamos viviendo es una clara señal para todos que hay que dejar de depender de las exportaciones de commodities y sus volátiles precios. Hoy en día, tenemos que agregar valor a nuestros productos, integrar cadenas de valor regionales y globales y participar más plenamente en la sociedad del conocimiento. La adopción de las medidas adecuadas para aumentar la productividad y la competitividad a nivel local es una manera de lograrlo, que se complementa con el fomento del comercio y la inversión entre nosotros y con otros bloques regionales a través de esquemas de integración económica.   Por último, existen desafíos globales, como el cambio climático, los conflictos internos de los países y entre los países y actores no estatales y el aumento de los flujos migratorios, los cuales tienen un impacto mayor en mujeres, niños y ancianos, en los más vulnerables.  Pero todavía hay importantes focos de pobreza en la región. Las brechas entre ricos y pobres se han profundizado, y la nuestra es la región más desigual del mundo.  Permítanme dar algunos ejemplos:  A pesar de la importancia de la reducción de la pobreza experimentada por la región en décadas recientes, 165 millones de personas siguen siendo pobres. Es decir, 3 de cada 10 personas, y 69 millones que viven en la pobreza extrema.  Y hay un hecho, que es particularmente preocupante: la alta pobreza infantil. CEPAL estimó que hay 70,5 millones de niños y adolescentes que viven en la pobreza, en la región. Es decir, 4 de cada 10.  Ésta es una llamada de atención urgente, porque hay que tener en cuenta esta realidad, que prevé un futuro poco prometedor para estos niños, poniendo un signo de interrogación sobre el futuro de América Latina.  Por otro lado, con respecto a la desigualdad económica, vemos que el quintil de ingresos más pobre de los hogares recibe un 5,6% de los ingresos totales, mientras que el quintil más rico se queda con el 46,7%.  Por desgracia, ésta es una tendencia cada vez más aguda, y no sólo en nuestro continente. Ustedes probablemente conocen el estudio del año pasado de OXFAM, en el que el 1% de los más ricos posee el 48% de la riqueza, y se espera que esta cifra llegue a 54% en 2019.  Y si lo miramos más de cerca, es aún más dramático: en la actualidad, 80 de las personas más ricas del mundo poseen la misma porción de la torta que 3,6 mil millones de mujeres y hombres pobres. Nadie puede decir que esta situación es justa.  En cuanto a la desigualdad de acceso a los servicios, podemos mencionar -por ejemplo- que 4 de cada 10 familias no tienen techo para vivir o viven en viviendas de mala calidad. Este porcentaje supera el 70% en países como Nicaragua, Bolivia y Perú.  Mientras tanto, el 33% de la población rural de la región carece de servicios de saneamiento básico, y el 36% no tiene agua potable.  ¿Por qué menciono esto? Porque todo esto demuestra que aunque la región ha hecho algunos avances –importantes avances- todavía estamos lejos de la sociedad que anhelamos, y que el tiempo para la acción, el "entorno propicio", si se me permite decirlo, es ahora.  Revertir estas deficiencias y avanzar hacia la construcción de una mejor sociedad implica la lucha contra la pobreza y la exclusión, la creación de condiciones para la igualdad, y la apertura de espacios para la diversidad. Y eso es lo que estamos haciendo.  De tal forma que permítanme hablar un poco sobre Chile y las reformas.   En Chile, estamos construyendo consenso y poniendo mucha energía en la generación de igualdad de derechos y oportunidades y la equidad y la inclusión en diferentes frentes, como los impuestos, la educación, el trabajo, la política, la niñez y la juventud, y el género, el pacto de unión civil para parejas del mismo sexo, entre otros.  El foco está de lleno puesto en la igualdad y la cohesión y por eso en mi país se están llevando a cabo reformas destinadas a reducir las desigualdades y la segregación social, porque entendemos que eso permitirá expandir los derechos y oportunidades para todos.  Estamos haciendo grandes esfuerzos para cerrar las brechas sociales y prevenir que segmentos de la población queden atrás e integrar a los excluidos.  Nuestro objetivo -como ya he dicho en otras ocasiones- es doble. Queremos que todos los ciudadanos, independientemente de su condición social, política, cultural, sexual o geográfica, desarrollen su potencial de desarrollo y tengan una buena vida. Y, por otro lado, también queremos que todos y cada uno de ellos contribuyan al desarrollo común del país. Creo que es lo justo por hacer, pero también es lo inteligente por hacer.  Buscamos, en definitiva, desarrollar habilidades personales y fortalezas colectivas, y las diversas reformas que estamos implementando apuntan todas en esa dirección.  Por ejemplo, hemos llevado a cabo una reforma tributaria, la más grande de su tipo en los últimos 30 años, lo que provocó grandes debates y controversias, pero que finalmente recibió un apoyo abrumador en nuestro Congreso.  Es una reforma que nos permitirá compartir la carga de una manera más equitativa y más justa, de modo que los que tienen más, contribuyen más. En total, el 73% de los ingresos fiscales adicionales vienen del 0,1% de los miembros más ricos de la sociedad. Y esta reforma garantiza la financiación permanente para esas transformaciones, especialmente en educación y protección social, las que prometimos y que fueron apoyadas por nuestros ciudadanos.  También estamos llevando adelante importantes reformas políticas, en esencia las que darán lugar a un sistema más democrático, transparente y político. Hemos sustituido el sistema electoral binominal, heredado de la dictadura.  El nuevo sistema electoral nos permitirá que tengamos una democracia más representativa y legítima, en la que cada voto vale lo que realmente merece, donde hay una mayor competencia y una mayor equidad territorial en los criterios de representación.  Junto con ello, hemos avanzado hacia la igualdad de género con un sistema de cuotas, que establece que, a partir de ahora, al menos el 40% de la lista candidata de un partido debe ser de mujeres. y fue muy difícil de lograr, yo traté de hacerlo en mi primer gobierno y no lo pude lograr, porque sabemos, en Chile tenemos un dicho popular –no es muy bueno, pero es un dicho popular- “hecha la ley, hecha la trampa”. De tal manera que decidimos, para evitar esto, para lograrlo, tener dos requisitos: cada partido que inscriba su lista, tiene que tener 40% de candidatas o de lo contrario, no podrá inscribirla. Y en segundo lugar, el partido que elige más mujeres, recibirá un incentivo económico del Estado.  Porque en Chile, creemos que mientras las mujeres, que constituyen más del 50% de la población de mi país, sigan estando insuficientemente representadas en el Congreso y el Ejecutivo, la democracia no será verdaderamente representativa.  Por esta razón, y porque estamos seguros de que las contribuciones de las mujeres son fundamentales para el progreso económico y social, hemos dado prioridad al trabajo por la igualdad de género.  Hemos fortalecido lo institucional para promover y garantizar los derechos de todas las mujeres. También hemos impulsado otras políticas destinadas a salvaguardar estos principios básicos, como el derecho a la vida libre de violencia, la libertad y la seguridad.  Por ejemplo, para proteger a las víctimas de la violencia, que en Chile causa alrededor de 40 femicidios por año, estamos duplicando el número de Casas de Acogida para las mujeres, con o sin sus hijos, cuando son amenazadas por la violencia. Y vamos a aumentar en un 25% el número de Centros que ofrecen apoyo y asistencia oportuna a las mujeres que lo necesitan. Pero si hablamos de políticas que promuevan la igualdad, la más importante de ellas se centra actualmente en la educación.  Éste es un tema particularmente relevante -y así lo entendíamos desde un principio- ya que es en esta área donde están las esperanzas de las generaciones más jóvenes y sus familias, y en ello reside el futuro de la nación, su capacidad para progresar, tener cohesión y la democratización. Pero también es la clave para asegurar una economía sustentable con mayores niveles de productividad, y que es uno de los temas en los que estamos trabajando muy fuertemente.  Sólo a través de la educación, podemos entregar las herramientas esenciales para el pleno desarrollo de cada individuo, preparar a los niños y jóvenes para la vida en sociedad y fortalecer las bases de la democracia.  Por lo tanto, las escuelas deben ser un espacio para el aprendizaje, la integración, la comprensión de las diferencias, la promoción de la igualdad civil y para el contacto con la experiencia democrática.  Aunque en las últimas décadas, hemos avanzado de manera significativa en la cobertura y el acceso a la educación, tenemos un grave déficit en la calidad, sobre todo en los sectores más pobres. De manera que tenemos sistemas muy segregados que no sólo no son propicios para la integración, sino también se reproducen y amplían las desigualdades sociales. Ello ha dañado profundamente la movilidad social, ha contribuido a que las diferencias se acentúen y, en consecuencia, impidió que los chilenos compartieran una visión de país, de reconocerse entre sí en un contexto más amplio que su propia vida en la diversidad y construir canales de cooperación.  Así que, yo diría que no contribuye a la construcción del país inclusivo y democrático que buscamos.  Éstas son sólo algunas de las deficiencias de nuestro sistema educativo que ya estamos corrigiendo. Hemos promulgado una ley que termina con la práctica de que las familias tengan que pagar una parte del pago mensual en las escuelas privadas que reciben fondos públicos. Además, elimina el proceso de selección y el lucro en todas las escuelas primarias y secundarias, que reciben fondos públicos.  A medio plazo, nuestro objetivo es que todas las escuelas alcancen niveles equivalentes de excelencia e inclusión, y se conviertan en la piedra angular del Chile que todos soñamos.  Hay otras medidas, como la educación superior gratuita, que vamos a empezar a aplicar el próximo año. Buscamos asegurar que la educación –no estamos hablando de cualquier educación, estamos hablando de educación de calidad- en todos los niveles, deje de ser un bien de consumo, que no dependa de que las familias tengan para pagar y se vuelva un derecho social que garantice el acceso y particularmente la calidad para todos, y que sea un generador de oportunidades y movilidad social.  Pero debido a que la calidad debe continuar teniendo un importante rol en los profesores y en el liderazgo en las escuelas, también hemos aprobado una ley que mejora los salarios de los profesores, pero además pidiéndoles, demandándoles mejores desempeños.  Estamos también en el proceso de implementación de otras reformas, incluyendo el voto de chilenos en el exterior y un proceso participativo puesto en marcha recientemente para discutir cuáles son los valores y principios que queremos ver o reflexionar acerca de nuestra Constitución, que son los deberes y también los derechos de las personas y que se reflejen en la nueva Constitución y la forma en que vemos las diferentes instituciones del país, las instituciones políticas, todo tipo de instituciones, en cuanto a si creemos que la forma en la que Chile está organizado es la mejor forma o si hay algo que se debe cambiar.  Estas reformas nos permitirán reafirmar y fortalecer nuestra vocación por la democracia, la apertura económica, el crecimiento y el comercio, con una perspectiva a largo plazo.   Tal vez debería decir que no es mi intención cambiar la Constitución, para que la Presidenta pueda ser elegida una vez, y una, y otra vez; decirles que no es mi Constitución. No es una hecha a la medida, es la que va a representar al pueblo de Chile.   Respecto a la Integración Regional, ¿cómo hacer frente a la desaceleración económica mundial y asegurar que nos alejamos del bajo crecimiento que se ha convertido en la norma?  Una respuesta, a juicio de Chile, es la integración regional. Es a partir de América Latina y el Caribe, que hablamos al mundo, y nos esforzamos por presentar puntos de vista comunes que reflejen nuestras realidades. Reconocemos que existen diversas perspectivas políticas y económicas sobre cómo avanzar en el desarrollo dentro de la región, pero no vemos ello como un impedimento para buscar puntos de vista comunes, ya que existen intereses coincidentes dentro de nuestra región. Es factible avanzar hacia la integración regional en asuntos como la conectividad, la circulación de personas y la facilitación del comercio.  América Latina tiene ricos recursos y mercados de servicios y productos con valor agregado, y grandes oportunidades de inversión. Los bloques negocian a nivel mundial en estos días, y es por eso que debemos perseguir la integración regional. Podemos ser una mejor plataforma para el comercio mundial si actuamos juntos.  Chile tiene vocación como puente entre el Pacífico y el Atlántico, y entre las diversas economías, culturas y tradiciones políticas. Así, junto con nuestra red de acuerdos bilaterales, estamos buscando una mejor comprensión entre los dos bloques comerciales principales, la Alianza del Pacífico y el MERCOSUR, no de fusionarlos, sino un acuerdo sobre un plan de acción común que nos permitiría obtener más ventajas políticas y económicas, cada uno a su propio ritmo. Es lo que llamamos "la convergencia en la diversidad."  La Alianza del Pacífico es un ejemplo de ello. Es más que un acuerdo comercial, es una nueva manera de mirar los bloques comerciales, centrándose en la conectividad y la integración auténtica, lo que beneficia a todos nuestros ciudadanos. Dentro de la Alianza, estamos construyendo puentes mediante el patrocinio de la exención de visado, los intercambios educativos y los esquemas activos de cooperación.  En el caso de los cuatro miembros de la Alianza (Chile, Colombia, México y Perú), nos encontramos entre los más dinámicos de las Américas, con un crecimiento medio del PIB del 3,3% durante el período 2011-2013, superando el crecimiento global del PIB del 2,7% en Latinoamérica, en el mismo período. Además, las exportaciones de la Alianza del Pacífico aumentaron un promedio de 3,5%, en comparación con los precios de exportación invariables en otras partes de la región.  En el aspecto financiero, hemos creado un Mercado de Valores de América Latina, conocido como MILA, integrando las bolsas de valores de Colombia, Perú y Chile. México recientemente se convirtió en parte en esta iniciativa, porque necesitaba cambiar la legislación para poder hacerlo. La capitalización conjunta de las cuatro bolsas excede el US$ 1.25 millón de billones, en comparación con el US$ 1.22 millón de billones de la Bolsa de Valores de Sao Paulo, la segunda más grande de la región.  A finales de junio-principios de julio, vamos a realizar la Cumbre Presidencial de la Alianza del Pacífico, haciéndonos cargo de la Presidencia Pro Témpore de la Alianza por un año. Entre otras tareas, nuestro énfasis estará en aprovechar al máximo el nuevo Acuerdo de Comercio, en el fortalecimiento de los lazos con los 42 estados observadores -incluyendo el Reino Unido- la incorporación de las PYME en el Consejo Empresarial y el establecimiento de una agenda pública-privada en temas de innovación.  En esta misma línea, se ha avanzado en lo que respecta a los corredores bioceánicos, un desafío pendiente de la infraestructura para conectar mejor a ambas costas de América del Sur. Chile, Argentina, Brasil y Paraguay firmaron un acuerdo a finales de 2015 para hacer de estos corredores una prioridad a corto plazo.  En el ámbito de las inversiones, Chile tiene profundos lazos con los países, tanto en las costas del Pacífico como en el Atlántico. Entre 1990 y 2014, Chile ha invertido más de US$25 mil millones en Brasil y casi US$17 mil millones en Argentina. Mientras tanto, las inversiones chilenas en los países que son miembros de la Alianza del Pacífico son de US$ 17,5 mil millones en Colombia y US$14,5 mil millones en Perú.  Éstos son los ladrillos sobre los que hay que construir una integración regional más fuerte. Somos conscientes de la diversidad de nuestra región, pero hay que ser capaces de identificar también lo que nos une y cómo podemos integrar nuestras ideas, nuestras perspectivas, y la manera de relacionarse con otras potencias emergentes, así como antiguos aliados.  El TPP es una de tales disposiciones. Fue firmado el 04 de febrero de 2016, después de una negociación de 5 años. Para la economía de Chile, el TPP presenta ventajas en el acceso al mercado que permitirán la diversificación de nuestras exportaciones. Por otra parte, el nuevo mecanismo de acumulación de origen facilitará nuestra integración con las cadenas de valor regionales y globales.  El TPP presenta claras ventajas para el desarrollo mundial con el establecimiento de normas comerciales con, si se me permite decirlo, los estándares del siglo XXI y estamos seguros de que este acuerdo será el modelo para todos los futuros acuerdos comerciales.  El Gobierno de Chile ha sostenido numerosas consultas públicas y enviará el Acuerdo del TPP al Congreso para su aprobación, probablemente en el segundo semestre de este año. Nuestro objetivo es tener un debate amplio y democrático, que tendrá en cuenta los diferentes puntos de vista presentes en nuestra sociedad. Somos conscientes de que probablemente habrá oposición, pero estamos convencidos de que los beneficios de este Tratado son mayores que los costos.  Valoramos el diálogo birregional entre la CELAC y la UE. Chile se ha comprometido a desarrollar un papel como articulador de consenso en todo el proceso de análisis que los ministros de Asuntos Exteriores de la CELAC y la UE llevarán a cabo en octubre, en República Dominicana. El objetivo es mejorar el diálogo político concreto en las áreas en que ambas partes están de acuerdo, en el Plan de Acción Común CELAC-UE.  Por último, quiero hacer hincapié en la importancia del Acuerdo de Asociación con la Unión Europea para el desarrollo de Chile. Estamos muy interesados en la modernización de este acuerdo y sus pilares: lo político, el comercio y la cooperación para el desarrollo. De tal manera que no debería meterme en cuestiones internas, pero sería excelente si pudiéramos contar con el apoyo del Reino Unido en la UE, para que así pudiéramos de verdad aprobar, aprobar esta modernización de nuestro tratado comercial. Así que, esperamos contar con su apoyo para el inicio de las negociaciones a finales de año.  Hablando sobre Gobernabilidad Global, Chile también contribuye a ella en algunas cuestiones clave, como el cambio climático, los océanos, los derechos humanos, la Agenda 2030 y el mantenimiento de la paz. Se ha avanzado a través de una estrecha interacción dentro de la región como en lo multilateral. Queda mucho por hacer y estamos seguros de que, junto con amigos con perspectivas similares, como el Reino Unido, vamos a seguir avanzando.  En la COP 21, adoptamos un acuerdo legalmente vinculante que establece un plan de acción global para evitar los peligros del cambio climático, a través de limitar el calentamiento global por debajo de 2°C.  Chile es uno de los países más afectados por el cambio climático. En marzo de 2015, la Península Antártica registró la temperatura más alta desde que se tiene registros oficiales: 17.5 Celsius. Tres días más tarde, en el norte de Chile, en el desierto de Atacama, llovió en un día el equivalente a 14 años, causando un desastre natural masivo que dejó enormes pérdidas materiales y humanas.  Es por esto que estamos interesados en la idea de celebrar una cumbre de los países más vulnerables del mundo, con el fin de intercambiar experiencias, aprender buenas prácticas y hacer propuestas concretas. Muchos de los que están dentro de la región, que han sufrido una serie de desastres naturales en los últimos años, la mayoría de ellos están vinculados al cambio climático. Este fenómeno no es abstracto, sino que tiene consecuencias reales que afectan a los ciudadanos y, como tal, es un desafío para la política exterior.  En este contexto, en octubre pasado, organizamos la Segunda Conferencia "Nuestro Mar", en Valparaíso. Esta iniciativa chileno-estadounidense busca promover la conservación y la sostenibilidad de nuestro océano como un instrumento para controlar el cambio climático. En la Conferencia, los delegados hicieron numerosos compromisos, incluyendo el establecimiento de áreas marinas protegidas, y teniendo en cuenta la creación de nuevas alianzas entre los Estados nacionales y los actores no gubernamentales. La participación de la sociedad civil, incluidas las organizaciones no gubernamentales importantes, como Oceana, WWF o National Geographic fueron fundamentales para el éxito de esta iniciativa, que celebrará su tercera versión en Washington este otoño.  Una cuestión importante y relevante para la gobernabilidad global es la Agenda 2030 y los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible, acordados en septiembre del año pasado en Nueva York, con el apoyo activo de Chile. Los 17 ODS constituyen un todo integrado e indivisible de los tres pilares del desarrollo sostenible: económico, social y ambiental. Desde enero, Chile es miembro recién electo del Consejo Económico y Social de la ONU (ECOSOC). Nuestra prioridad será el desarrollo inclusivo y la implementación de un mecanismo de seguimiento de la Agenda 2030 y los ODS. También vamos a ser la voz de los países de ingreso medio de nuestra región.  En el ámbito de los derechos humanos, quiero destacar nuestro firme apoyo a los Principios Rectores de los Derechos Humanos y de Negocios, que tienen un amplio consenso internacional. Éstos ofrecen una orientación clara a los Estados y a las empresas en la protección y el respeto de los derechos humanos. Estamos trabajando en la implementación nacional de estos principios a través de la elaboración de un Plan Nacional de Acción, que abordará cuestiones como la discriminación en el trabajo, el respeto a las comunidades, las cadenas de producción, el trabajo infantil, la corrupción, los derechos laborales y el respeto al medio ambiente. Esta Agenda insta a las empresas a identificar y abordar los potenciales impactos sobre esos derechos, y por lo tanto prevenir conflictos entre empresas y su entorno. Estamos muy agradecidos con el Reino Unido por la colaboración que nos han dado sobre este tema.  Como actor responsable en asuntos globales, Chile ha participado activamente en operaciones de paz. Haití es el más importante, donde Chile representa una gran parte del 75% de las fuerzas de paz que provienen de América Latina. Al mismo tiempo, también hemos contribuido al proceso de estabilización política, a través del fortalecimiento de las políticas e instituciones públicas. La experiencia de trabajar en estrecha colaboración con otros países de América Latina en esta misión ha sido gratificante y ha llevado a la creación de una fuerza combinada bilateral con Argentina, la Cruz del Sur, con fines de mantenimiento de paz. Una vez que se firme la paz en Colombia, vamos a estar ahí como parte de del proceso de paz, como garantes. Estaremos ahí como parte de una misión política para apoyar la implementación de la paz.  Amigos:  Sé que aquí está caluroso, así que de verdad voy a terminar ahora.  He abordado algunos de los problemas del presente y el futuro que representan desafíos para nuestro Chile y la región. Necesitamos encontrar respuestas y nuevas formas de resolver estos desafíos nacionales, regionales y globales del siglo XXI, de manera que podamos continuar avanzando hacia el desarrollo sostenible. No será fácil. Pero no tenemos otra opción racional, sino trabajar unos con otros para construir las nuevas estructuras internacionales para las nuevas realidades.  Muchas gracias.