(Versión original)  Ladies and Gentlemen:   It is a great pleasure to be here in Georgetown today in the official inauguration of the Embassy of Chile in Guyana, which will also represent Chile in the Secretary of CARICOM. This moment paves the way for strengthening existing ties, not only between Chile and Guyana but also between Chile and CARICOM countries.   Guyana is a key partner for Chile in the Caribbean, being the host country of CARICOM, a member of UNASUR and CELAC and of course in the Organization of American States.   And Chile aims to advance towards a more integrated region. We promote convergence in diversity and encourage a constructive dialogue among the States and the sub regional fora.  We believe that when we work together as a group, despite of the legitimate difference like a family, our voice is stronger and our interests more readily addressed.   In this sense, the opening of the Embassy of Chile in Guyana is not an accident; it is completely voluntary done because it is another step towards our main purpose: working together in the search of new horizons and the opportunities.     That was the main objective –and it remains valid today- of the political decision taken by President Salvador Allende and that time Prime Minister Linden Forbes Sampson Burnham, to establish diplomatic relations in 1971.   The ties between Chile and CARICOM have always constituted a cornerstone in Chilean’s foreign policy. Therefore I take this unique opportunity to renew our commitment to a closer political, economic and cooperation exchange with CARICOM and to thank Guyana for its support to the creation of deep and powerful relations with the nations of the Caribbean.   And in order to achieve this goal, we are convinced that cooperation and solidarity for regional efforts are the key elements. We also believe that a sustained political dialogue among States is an effective strategy for the accomplishment of social and economic development and our people’s wellbeing.   Thirty years ago, in 1996, CARICOM and Chile consolidated our social, historical, and cultural bonds by signing an Agreement on Scientific and Technical Cooperation, addressing areas such as agriculture, health and nutrition, and foreign language training. This agreement continues to provide a useful basis for cooperation and a foundation of mutual trust.   Chile is willing to cooperate with CARICOM in the actions, programs and fields identified by the Secretariat technical bodies, according to the priorities that are of common interest and benefit. We are implementing projects in areas such as disaster prevention, food security, institutional strengthening and modernization and trade promotion.   We are certain that we can look at the future with optimism and eagerness of what has yet to be accomplished. I believe we can work in close and creative harmony exploring fresh opportunities as well as building a network of activities for a strategic relation between Guyana and Chile. That is the way to achieve peace for our people and stability for our regions.   So, thank you very much and I am sure, as I mentioned during the Summit of the CARICOM where we were invited to address, that for us this official opening -but remembering this decision to open an embassy here in Guyana- it is not only to strengthen our relations with Guyana, but also with Secretary of CARICOM that will be really important step to make all this political will a reality. And we will continue working very strongly with the Caribbean countries and with CARICOM.   It is not a joke, I would say, but I am not a candidate I have to say, you looked our strange faces, it is because the journalists asked me if I came to CARICOM looking for support to the Secretary of UN, I am not a candidate, I am President until march of 2018, and I have been proud of being President of Chile, thank you so much.   *****  (Traducción)   Damas y caballeros:   Es un gran placer estar hoy aquí en Georgetown en la inauguración de la Embajada de Chile en Guyana, la que también representa a Chile en la Secretaría de CARICOM. Este momento prepara el camino para el fortalecimiento de los lazos existentes, no sólo entre Chile y Guyana, sino también entre Chile y los países de la CARICOM.   Guyana es un compañero clave para Chile en el Caribe, por ser el país anfitrión de la CARICOM, miembro de UNASUR y CELAC y por supuesto en la Organización de los Estados Americanos.   Y Chile tiene como objetivo avanzar hacia una región más integrada. Promovemos la convergencia en la diversidad y fomentamos un diálogo constructivo entre los Estados y los Foros Subregionales. Creemos que cuando trabajamos juntos como grupo –a pesar de las diferencias legítimas que tengamos como familia- nuestra voz es más fuerte y nuestros intereses son mejor abordados.   En este sentido, la apertura de la Embajada de Chile en Guyana no es un accidente; se ha hecho completamente por voluntad, porque es otro paso hacia nuestro objetivo principal: trabajar juntos en la búsqueda de nuevos horizontes y las oportunidades.   Ése fue el principal objetivo –que continua vigente hasta hoy- de la decisión política adoptada por el Presidente Salvador Allende y el entonces Primer Ministro Linden Forbes Burnham Sampson, para establecer relaciones diplomáticas en 1971.    Los lazos entre Chile y CARICOM siempre han constituido una piedra angular de la política exterior chilena. Por lo tanto, aprovecho esta oportunidad única para renovar nuestro compromiso con un intercambio político, económico y cooperativo más estrecho con CARICOM, y dar las gracias a CARICOM por su apoyo en la creación de poderosas y profundas relaciones con las naciones del Caribe.   Y para lograr este objetivo, estamos convencidos de que la cooperación y la solidaridad en esfuerzos regionales son elementos clave. También creemos que el diálogo político sostenido entre los Estados es una estrategia eficaz para lograr el desarrollo social y económico, y el bienestar de nuestros pueblos.   Hace treinta años, en 1996, la CARICOM y Chile consolidaron nuestros lazos culturales, históricos y sociales, mediante la firma de un Acuerdo de Cooperación Científica y Técnica, en ámbitos como la agricultura, la salud y la nutrición, y la formación en lenguas extranjeras. Este acuerdo sigue proporcionando una base útil para la cooperación y la confianza mutua.   Chile está dispuesto a cooperar con la CARICOM en las acciones, programas y campos indicados por los órganos técnicos de la Secretaría, de acuerdo con las prioridades que son de interés y beneficio común. Estamos implementando proyectos en áreas como la prevención de desastres, la seguridad alimentaria, el fortalecimiento institucional y la modernización, y la promoción del comercio.   Estamos seguros de que podemos mirar el futuro con optimismo y entusiasmo de lo que aún tenemos que lograr. Creo que podemos trabajar en estrecha armonía creativa y explorar nuevas oportunidades, así como la construcción de una red de actividades para las relaciones estratégicas entre Guyana y Chile. Ésa es la manera de alcanzar la paz para nuestros pueblos y la estabilidad de nuestras regiones.   Así que, muchas gracias, y estoy segura, como he mencionado, durante la Cumbre de la CARICOM, donde nos invitaron a dar un discurso, que para nosotros esta apertura oficial, -recordando esta decisión de abrir una embajada aquí en Guyana- no es sólo para fortalecer nuestras las relaciones con Guyana, sino también con la Secretaría de la CARICOM, lo que será un paso muy importante para hacer realidad la voluntad política. Y seguiremos trabajando muy fuertemente con los países del Caribe y la CARICOM.   No es una broma, yo diría, que no soy candidata debo decir, ustedes vieron nuestras caras extrañadas, porque los periodistas me preguntaron si yo vine a CARICOM buscando apoyo para la Secretaría de la ONU, pero no soy candidata, soy Presidenta hasta marzo del 2018 y me he sentido orgullosa de ser Presidenta de Chile, así que muchas gracias.