(Original Speech)     Ladies and gentleman:   Firstly I would like to express my gratitude for being invited to participate this 19th International Conference of Banking Supervisors. And I am not saying as a simple formality.   And I am saying it, in the first place because by choosing Chile as the location for this Conference, we are deeply honored, and this acknowledged for the seriousness with which we have faced our challenges have been economic, political and institutional.   We consider this is an additional step in the journey that we have travelled together since we were invited in 2014 to be an observer member of the Basel Committee. We value the opportunity to share our perspective and to facilitate the integration of our financial market with the international financial community.   As you well know, we are working to be able to join the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision as a full member.   And also it were of the importance of this Conference for the international community, not only because the intrinsic relevance of this opportunity for international cooperation, but also because the conversations that have been taking place, it will have direct effects on the path of our economies and more globally on the functioning of the institutions on which our well-being depends.   By setting the international standard for the prudential regulations of Banks and offering a cooperative forum for banking supervisory issues, the Basel Committee plays a crucial role in uncertain times.     And our people have experienced for firsthand and with a high social cost, the tough consequences of the financial crisis.   Consequences that, on the case of 2008 crisis, are not completed over and, in fact, can be seen beyond the confines of the financial market.   We have witness how in many places around the world our social networks are being undermined, our institutions are being stressed and our political systems are being tested.   This is a challenge that we are facing and to which all we have to contribute to a solution. Because finally what is at stake is the building of trusts and in this matter we have a role to play.     For this reason it is gratifying to know that the agreements of the Committee on the last days have allowed us to move forward on what is most important: the development of the consensus. This is the way of moving forward as a group.    And I am certain that these discussions will lead -your discussions today and the discussions that you done yesterday- to more coordination and necessary regulations to be better prepared for facing future crisis; and it allow countries to recover the growth rates with sound funding.   Every country has its own challenges, indeed. In the case of Chile, we seek to recover our economy competitiveness by focusing on productivity and diversification of our economic activities.    And we are confident that having a successful policy in terms of financial regulation and supervision, that has allowed us to deepen our financial markets and to promote the development of the country.   It has been a process of constant improvement and which is strongly mark by the lessons learnt from the severe banking crisis we lived in the middle of eighties.   We are certain that we need to improve.   And it is the reason that from the beginning of our government, we have set out ourselves a crucial task: to promote a reform of General Banking Act, which in a gradual manner it allowed us to decrease the gaps that separate us from the best international standards in terms of banking supervision and regulation.     So, what are those gaps? Mainly two:   The first gap is in the Capital Adequacy.     Even though our financial System is well capitalized, it is necessary for us to reach international standards by following some basic principles. We have to adapt Basel 3 to the local reality, so that our regulations are functional for the local financial system.   We need also to implement the changes gradually, so we do not unnecessarily and unfairly impact the growth potential of banks in the short and middle term.   And thirdly, the changes that we have put for should be the result of an agreement from all the relevant players.   The second gap is the Corporate Governance of the Superintendence of Banks and Financial Institutions of Chile. In line with the best international practices, it is necessary for us to continue strengthening the supervisory body and accountability, so the supervisor can do its job in an independent, unbiased and highly efficient manner.   And I am not saying that is not independent right now, but we want even to improve it.   We have made very important steps to hustle our capital market and to ensure a stable financial system that contributes to the development of the country.     We want Chile to be the financial center of the region and a reliable and attractive enter point for foreign investors.   We have recently enacted the law that introduces as measures to stimulate productivity. And among these measures, there are several that precisely deepening the capital market and increasing liquidity.     We are also in the final stage of passing the law that creates the Financial Market Commission, which it will allow us to have a better supervision and regulation of our stock markets. This law is part of a package of reforms that includes the General Banking Act reform.   Dear Friends:   The joint and coordinated work among our countries is and will continue to be the fundamental condition for the development.     And I know that this International Conference of Banking Supervisor will be surely very successful, contributing then to the strengthening of the banking regulation and supervision in our countries.   And I am sure that this Conference has been and will be “an exercise of trust” which we will be able to put at the service of the wellbeing and development of our countries.   So, thank you very much for you already done and a great success on the rest of the day.     (Traducción)    Damas y caballeros:   En primer lugar, me gustaría expresar mi agradecimiento por ser invitada a participar en esta 19° Conferencia Internacional de Supervisores Bancarios. Y no lo digo como una simple fórmula protocolar.   Y lo digo, en primer lugar, porque al elegir a Chile como sede, se nos ha honrado profundamente y se hizo un reconocimiento a la seriedad con que hemos encarado nuestros desafíos económicos, políticos e institucionales.   Lo consideramos un paso adicional en que el camino que hemos recorrido juntos desde que en 2014 fuéramos invitados a participar como miembro observador del Comité de Basilea. Valoramos la posibilidad de entregar nuestros puntos de vista y facilitar la integración de nuestro mercado financiero con la comunidad financiera internacional.   Y como bien saben, estamos trabajando para poder incorporarnos muy pronto como miembros plenos al Comité de Supervisión Bancaria de Basilea.   Y también fue por la importancia de esta Conferencia para la comunidad internacional, no sólo por la relevancia intrínseca de esta oportunidad para la cooperación internacional, sino también porque las conversaciones que han tenido lugar, tendrán efectos  directos en la marcha de nuestras economías y, más globalmente, en el funcionamiento de las instituciones en que descansa nuestro bienestar.   Al establecer los estándares globales para la regulación prudencial de los bancos y ofrecer un foro de cooperación en temas de supervisión bancaria, el Comité de Basilea cumple un rol esencial en un período marcado por la búsqueda de certidumbres.   Nuestros pueblos han experimentado en carne propia, y con un alto costo en términos humanos, las duras consecuencias de las crisis financieras.   Consecuencias que, en el caso de la crisis de 2008, no han quedado completamente atrás y que por, el contrario, se manifiestan más allá de los límites de los sistemas financieros.   Somos testigos de cómo en muchos lugares del mundo se fragilizan nuestros lazos sociales, se tensionan nuestras instituciones y se pone a prueba la plasticidad de nuestros sistemas políticos.   Éste es el desafío que todos enfrentamos y a lo que todos debemos contribuir para solucionar. Porque lo que está en juego es la construcción de confianzas, y en este tema, todos tenemos un papel que jugar.   Por eso es tan satisfactorio saber que los acuerdos del Comité en los últimos días nos han permitido avanzar en lo más importante: en la creación de acuerdos. Ésta es la forma de avanzar en bloque.   Y estoy segura que estas discusiones –sus discusiones de hoy y las que tuvieron ayer- conducirán a una mayor coordinación y reglas adecuadas para estar mejor preparados para afrontar futuras crisis; y permitir que los países recuperen sus tasas de crecimiento con un sólido financiamiento.   Cada uno de nosotros enfrenta además sus propios desafíos. En el caso de Chile, buscamos recuperar la competitividad de nuestra economía mediante un fuerte énfasis en productividad y la diversificación de nuestras actividades económicas.   Y estamos seguros de contar con una política exitosa en términos de regulación y supervisión financiera, que nos ha permitido profundizar en nuestros mercados financieros y promover el desarrollo del país.   Ha sido un proceso de mejora constante y que está fuertemente marcado por las lecciones aprendidas de la severa crisis de panificación que vivimos a mediados de los ochenta.   Tenemos claro que hay que seguir mejorando.   Y por eso es que desde el inicio de nuestro gobierno nos planteamos una tarea fundamental: impulsar una reforma a la Ley General de Bancos, que en forma gradual permita acortar las brechas que nos separan de los mejores estándares internacionales en materia de regulación y supervisión bancaria.   De manera que ¿cuáles son esas brechas? Principalmente dos:   La primera brecha está en la Adecuación de Capital.   Si bien nuestro sistema financiero se encuentra sanamente capitalizado, es necesario acercarse a los estándares internacionales en la materia, siguiendo algunos criterios básicos. Tenemos que adaptar Basilea 3 a la realidad local, de modo que nuestras regulaciones sean funcionales para el sistema financiera local.   También necesitamos implementar los cambios en forma gradual, de modo de no afectar innecesaria e injustificadamente el potencial de crecimiento de los bancos en el corto y mediano plazo.   Y en tercer lugar, los cambios que hemos hecho deben ser el resultado de un acuerdo de todos los actores relevantes.   La segunda brecha es el Gobierno Corporativo de la Superintendencia de Bancos e Instituciones Financieras de Chile. De acuerdo a las mejores prácticas internacionales, es necesario seguir fortaleciendo al supervisor y los sistemas de rendición de cuentas, de modo que el supervisor pueda realizar su labor de manera independiente, ecuánime y eficiente. Y no estoy diciendo que no sea independiente en este momento, sino que queremos incluso mejorarlo.   Hemos dado pasos muy importantes para dinamizar nuestro mercado de capitales y asegurar un sistema financiero estable que contribuya al desarrollo del país.   Queremos que Chile sea la plataforma financiera de la región y puerta de entrada, confiable y atractiva, para los inversionistas internacionales.   Recientemente hemos promulgado la ley que introduce un conjunto de medidas para estimular la productividad. Dentro de ellas, varias apuntan precisamente a profundizar el mercado de capitales y aumentar su liquidez.   Además, estamos en la etapa final de la tramitación que crea la Comisión de Mercados Financieros, entidad que permitirá una mejor supervisión y regulación de nuestros mercados de valores. Esta ley es parte de un paquete de reformas que incluye la reforma a la Ley General de Bancos.   Estimados amigos:   El trabajo conjunto y coordinado entre los países es y seguirá siendo condición indispensable para el desarrollo.   Y sé que esta Conferencia Internacional de Supervisores Bancarios será, sin duda, muy exitosa, contribuyendo entonces al fortalecimiento de la regulación y supervisión bancaria en nuestros países.   Y estoy segura de que esta Conferencia ha sido y será "un ejercicio de confianza" que podremos poner al servicio del bienestar y desarrollo de nuestros países.   Así que muchas gracias por lo ya realizado y mucho éxito en el resto de la jornada.