(Versión Original)   Ladies and gentleman:  It is a great honor for me to chair this Ministerial Council Meeting (MCM) of the OECD for the first time, since Chile joined the Organization in January 2010. Over these six years as a member country, we have been strongly benefited from the policy guidance provided by this organization, and assimilated key lessons from many of the member countries and partners on how to address our common economic and social challenges in the best way. I am confident that we have also contributed to the enrichment of the policy debate within this organization.  We thank the Secretariat and you in particular, Secretary-General, for all the support through this rich and intense journey. My sincere congratulations and good wishes to you on your third term, which has just begun.  I also would like to thank our Vice-Chairs: Japan, Finland and Hungary, for their enthusiastic and constructive engagement in the preparations of this Ministerial meeting.  As you mentioned Secretary-general, global economic recovery around the world remains fragile, and there are important downside risks. Trade and investment flows are weak, and unemployment remains at high levels in many countries. On top of that, income inequality and the lack of opportunities for many, including the most vulnerable, have increased in several countries, while remaining high in others. These economic and social challenges demand decisive policy actions.  The slowdown of the economy is the result of cyclical factors affecting global demand, as well as an important deterioration of our growth capacity. In countries where low growth is the result of weak demand, an appropriate mix of monetary and fiscal stimulus is required.  In parallel, we must accelerate the pace of structural reforms to expand our growth potential. In particular, boosting productivity is the key determinant of growth over the medium and long term. Higher productivity means more and better job opportunities, higher wages and better living standards for our people.   Given this context, this year´s Ministerial Council Meeting theme “Enhancing Productivity for Inclusive Growth” is very appropriate. While raising productivity is a key challenge for all our countries, it is also true that the world has changed.  The increasing complexity of social challenges and the need for policies to adapt to these changes, place the inclusiveness dimension at the core of policy making. Within a framework of increasing inequalities, enhancing productivity for inclusive growth becomes, in our view, an imperative.  All of us must not only contribute to make our economies more productive, but also promote inclusion which allows everyone to reap the benefits of better economic outcomes. Our societies aspire to and deserve more cohesion and wellbeing and it’s our responsibility to respond to this challenge with creative and innovative solutions.  I would like to highlight three areas, where increasing productivity plays a key role in achieving a more inclusive society.  The first one is preparing our people for work in the future.  A new production revolution is currently taking place, with the ensuing impacts on the economy and society. Technological advancements such as the internet, big data, artificial intelligence and biotechnology are reshaping the concept of work. While some traditional jobs are in danger of being automatized, new forms of flexible work are emerging, creating new opportunities and challenges.  As in the past, technological change will create new sectors and new jobs, providing new opportunities and better living standards for all.  Nevertheless, we must anticipate such scenarios and be prepared to deal with the resulting disruptions in the short and medium term.  In order to confront such challenges, we underscore the importance of policies aimed at building the necessary skills, particularly digital ones, that are required to adopt new technologies and adapt to an evolving labor market. Education and training systems must be improved and lifelong learning and training encouraged.  We need to ensure that specific groups, such as women and less skilled-workers, are given the same opportunities as others to participate and succeed in the labor market. We also need to adapt our safety nets to ensure a smooth transition to the new sectors and to preserve the quality of jobs in the case of increasing non-standard work contracts.  Last but not least, collaboration between social partners and social dialogue as a means to enhance productivity while promoting social inclusion is a fundamental piece in this policy response.  The second area is ensuring a level playing field.  Increases in productivity are the result of improved technology, better production processes and more efficient forms of organization at the firm level and within society. For this to happen, it is essential to have strong market competition, which in turn promotes productivity and ensures that more consumers have access to better goods.  Therefore, the best way to take advantage of markets is by enhancing competition.  We must ensure that the regulatory framework allows an efficient allocation of resources across the economy, promotes the adoption of new technologies and new business models, guaranteeing a positive creative destruction.  At the same time, firms with potential should be provided with the opportunity to grow and innovate. To level the playing-field we need to promote access to finance for SMEs, entrepreneurs and young and innovative firms.  Finally, we cannot ensure a level playing-field without due consideration of policies to foster integrity and transparency, in order to curb rent seeking, and avoid corruption.  The third and final area is building cities as a platform of innovation and social inclusion.  Most interactions between consumers, firms, universities and public institutions occur in cities. It is there where most of the exchange of ideas and the innovation process take place. Thus, we need smart cities to promote effective cooperation and creativity. This is a call for our countries to create policies to make our cities attractive places to live and collaborate, and to promote creativity and culture.  To reinforce this process of collaborative creation, we must avoid segregation and provide equal access to quality public services. Efficient transport systems, health services and housing policies, as well as to update digital infrastructure and access to information, just to name a few, can make a crucial difference in the creation and improvement of  opportunities for all, contributing to productivity and enhancing inclusiveness.  In this context, we cannot forget that local communities can present different demands and potentialities for boosting productivity. In addition, the success of investment projects that have an impact in local areas can benefit from the participation of local communities.  This challenge requires adapting our policies to local necessities when needed. Skills demand and infrastructure are two good examples. Labor market requirements may vary depending on the local context, while infrastructure development allows local economies to attract investment and to contribute to productivity.  What has Chile recently done to address some of these issues? These challenges are precisely at the core of the government program we have implemented in the last two years. Our goal is to build an inclusive social model, sustained and sustainable growth, and a dynamic and participatory democracy; all pillars that will contribute to make Chile a developed country.  First and foremost, education is at the heart of our changes. We have promoted reforms to strengthen public education and teachers’ skills. Along with ensuring non-discrimination in the school system -until now arbitrarily segregated- we are gradually providing free education for primary, secondary and higher education.  We have adopted a tax reform with a twofold objective: to finance this new way of thinking about education and to make our taxation burden more equitable.  We have promoted a labor reform, which will increase collective bargaining and strengthen trade unions, and although we have undergone a partial setback in the legislative process, we are looking for new ways to achieve that purpose.  We have also approved a new electoral system to improve competition and representative democracy.  Along with it, we have introduced substantive changes in the functioning of political parties and campaign funding mechanisms for politics as a way to tackle our transparency and probity deficits.  As a general framework for this process, we have launched a debate to develop a new Constitution, one that will be legitimate and updated through the broadest citizen participation possible.  These are the most important transformations, but not the only ones. Throughout this process, we have continually sought the technical support and know-how of the OECD and of our fellow members, many of whom have previously gone through these transformations. They have pointed out the pitfalls, but have also been an example of how equitable and sustainable economic growth can be achieved.   I would like to stress some global challenges that are closely related to the theme of this meeting.  I will start with gender. I am aware of the work the OECD is doing under the umbrella of the Gender Initiative and the role played by this institution to give priority to the gender issue within the G20.  And on the other hand, other issue that I talked with Secretary-General when I was in UN Women when I came to Ministerial Council that time, I spoke the Ministers of Finance on decisions and I have to say that Secretary-General was giving always a very strong support on the importance of gender in the development of the society and the economy. So, we know that we have doing a lot of work within the G-20, even though these initiatives are remarkable, they are not enough.  We all know that, despite the efforts made, gender gaps still remain. Thus, I encourage all of you to reflect on concrete actions and initiatives, both within your countries and at an international level - probably when you discuss tomorrow I think on the SDG, it will be a very important moment to do that- so in that way to complement the work already done and bring us closer to meeting SDG 5, to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls.  I would also like to note the importance of trade for development. Chile is a strong supporter of free markets and trade openness.  As a small country, we are convinced that promoting international trade and investment is one of the best ways to stimulate economic growth and thus, provide more opportunities for our people.  We welcome the work done by the OCDE on trade in value added, services and regional trade agreements.  We acknowledge the fact that participation of firms in global value chains are key drivers to technology diffusion and look forward to further research and recommendations in this area.  Finally, our work should actively include our communities. People demand more participation and accountability from our governments. This is fundamental to foster confidence in our political system, which also affects investment and economic dynamics. We require strong institutions to promote trust and transparency.  These global challenges - and emerging ones, such as the refugee crisis - require a multidimensional and coordinated response from the international community; a common response that takes into account diverse national contexts.  To achieve this goal, a well-coordinated system of multilateral institutions and international cooperation, with broad representation, clear mandates and effective tools is needed. In this context, the OECD plays a very important role as a standard setter of policies based in empirical evidence and reliable comparative data.  Chile welcomes the outreach efforts of the OECD and its objective of bringing global standards and best practices to non-members countries. We welcome the efforts made in this organization to encourage a broader exchange of views to tackle new challenges and to promote multidimensional and horizontal analysis and work.  The results allow us to grasp our complex world and shed light and identify solutions for the problems that hinder prosperity in our countries through the use of new and innovative tools.  I also want to congratulate Latvia on its successful conclusion of its accession process, and hope to welcome Colombia and Costa Rica as the next new members.  We are also pleased to be launching the LAC program this evening, aimed at promoting the OECD’s good practices in Latin America and the Caribbean.  Dear Friends:  Productivity is a multidimensional concept, as it involves doing more and better, being more creative and flexible, and having the capacity to anticipate and lead. This calls for innovation, talent, adaptability, participation, leadership and cooperation.  We are convinced that the productivity challenge can be better addressed by ensuring more and better opportunities for all. By reducing inequalities in areas like access to quality education, training opportunities, healthcare, gender, quality jobs or new technologies, we will bring all on board and benefit from their combined potential and contribution, thus increasing productivity, inclusiveness and growth.  These two days of intensive dialogue will give us an excellent opportunity to reflect on these challenges and strengthen our relationships. We see this MCM (Ministerial Council Meeting) as an invitation to work, cooperate and look for decisive policy responses for today´s challenges and those in the foreseeable future. It’s up to all of us to succeed in promoting better policies for better lives.  Thank you very much.     (Traducción)      Damas y caballeros:  Es un gran honor para mí presidir esta Reunión del Consejo Ministerial (MCM) de la OCDE, por primera vez, desde que Chile se unió a la Organización en enero de 2010. Durante estos seis años como país miembro, hemos resultado fuertemente beneficiados de la orientación de políticas proporcionada por esta organización, y hemos asimilado lecciones clave de muchos de los países miembros y asociados sobre cómo abordar los desafíos económicos y sociales comunes, de la mejor manera. Estoy segura de que también hemos contribuido al enriquecimiento del debate de políticas dentro de esta organización.  Agradecemos a la Secretaría y, en particular a usted, Secretario General, por todo el apoyo a través de este rico e intenso recorrido. Mis sinceras felicitaciones y buenos deseos para usted en su tercer mandato, que acaba de comenzar.  También me gustaría dar las gracias a nuestros Vicepresidentes: Japón, Finlandia y Hungría, por su entusiasta y constructiva participación en los preparativos de esta reunión ministerial.  Como usted mencionó Secretario General, la recuperación económica global en todo el mundo sigue siendo frágil, y hay importantes riesgos de desaceleración. Los flujos comerciales y de inversión son débiles, y el desempleo se mantiene en niveles altos en muchos países. Además de ello, la desigualdad de ingresos y la falta de oportunidades para muchos, incluidos los más vulnerables, han aumentado en varios países, sin dejar de ser alta en otros. Estos desafíos económicos y sociales exigen medidas normativas decisivas.  La desaceleración de la economía es el resultado de factores cíclicos que afectan la demanda mundial, así como un importante deterioro de nuestra capacidad de crecimiento. En los países donde el bajo crecimiento es el resultado de una débil demanda, se requiere una combinación adecuada de estímulo monetario y fiscal.  Paralelamente, debemos acelerar el ritmo de las reformas estructurales para expandir nuestro potencial de crecimiento. En particular, aumentar la productividad es el determinante clave del crecimiento en el mediano y largo plazo. Una mayor productividad significa más y mejores oportunidades de empleo, salarios más altos y mejores condiciones de vida para nuestra gente.  En este contexto, el tema de la Reunión del Consejo Ministerial de este año, "Aumentar la Productividad para el Crecimiento Inclusivo", resulta muy apropiado. Mientras que aumentar la productividad es un desafío fundamental para todos nuestros países, también es cierto que el mundo ha cambiado.  La creciente complejidad de los problemas sociales y la necesidad de políticas de adaptación a estos cambios, coloca la dimensión de la inclusión en la base de la formulación de políticas. Dentro de un marco de aumento de desigualdades, la mejora de la productividad para el crecimiento integrador se convierte, en nuestra opinión, en un imperativo.  Todos nosotros no sólo debemos contribuir a que nuestras economías sean más productivas, sino también a promover la inclusión que permite a todos aprovechar los beneficios de mejores resultados económicos. Nuestras sociedades aspiran y merecen más cohesión y bienestar y es nuestra responsabilidad responder a este desafío con soluciones creativas e innovadoras.  Me gustaría destacar tres áreas, donde aumentar la productividad juega un papel clave en la consecución de una sociedad más inclusiva.  La primera de ellas es preparar a nuestra gente para el trabajo en el futuro.  Actualmente, se está llevando a cabo una nueva revolución de la producción, con los consiguientes efectos sobre la economía y la sociedad. Los avances tecnológicos, como Internet, los macrodatos, la inteligencia artificial y la biotecnología están remodelando el concepto de trabajo. Mientras que algunos puestos de trabajo tradicionales están en peligro de ser automatizados, están emergiendo nuevas formas de trabajo flexible, creando nuevas oportunidades y desafíos.   Como en el pasado, el cambio tecnológico creará nuevos sectores y nuevos puestos de trabajo, proporcionando nuevas oportunidades y mejores condiciones de vida para todos. No obstante, debemos anticiparnos a tales escenarios y estar preparados para hacer frente a las alteraciones resultantes en el corto y medio plazo.  Para hacer frente a estos desafíos, hacemos hincapié en la importancia de las políticas destinadas a la construcción de las habilidades necesarias, en particular las digitales, que son necesarias para adoptar nuevas tecnologías y adaptarse a un mercado laboral en plena evolución. Se deben mejorar los sistemas de educación y formación y fomentar el aprendizaje y la formación permanentes.  Necesitamos garantizar que los grupos específicos, como las mujeres y trabajadores con menos capacidades laborales, reciban las mismas oportunidades que los demás para participar y tener éxito en el mercado laboral. También tenemos que adaptar nuestras redes de seguridad para garantizar una transición sin problemas a los nuevos sectores y preservar la calidad del empleo en el caso de que aumenten los contratos no estándares de trabajo.  Por último, pero no menos importante, la colaboración entre los interlocutores sociales y el diálogo social como medio para incrementar la productividad, que a la par promueve la inclusión social es una pieza fundamental en esta respuesta normativa.  La segunda área es garantizar la igualdad de condiciones.  Los aumentos en la productividad son el resultado de una mejor tecnología, mejores procesos de producción y formas más eficientes de organización a nivel empresarial y en la sociedad. Para que esto suceda, es esencial tener una fuerte competencia en el mercado, que a su vez promueva la productividad y asegure que más consumidores tengan acceso a mejores bienes.  Por lo tanto, la mejor manera de aprovechar los mercados es mediante el aumento de la competencia.  Debemos garantizar que el marco regulador permita una eficiente asignación de los recursos en la economía, que promueva la adopción de nuevas tecnologías y nuevos modelos de negocio, garantizando una positiva destrucción creativa.   Al mismo tiempo, las empresas con potencial deberán contar con la oportunidad de crecer e innovar. Para nivelar el campo de juego, tenemos que promover el acceso a la financiación para las PYME, los empresarios y las empresas jóvenes e innovadoras.  Por último, no podemos garantizar una igualdad de condiciones sin la debida consideración de políticas que fomenten la integridad y la transparencia, con el fin de contener la captación de rentas, y evitar la corrupción.  La tercera y última área es construir ciudades como plataformas de innovación e inclusión social.  La mayoría de las interacciones entre consumidores, empresas, universidades e instituciones públicas se producen en las ciudades. Es ahí donde se llevan a cabo la mayor parte del intercambio de ideas y procesos de innovación. Por lo tanto, necesitamos ciudades inteligentes para promover la cooperación y la creatividad efectivas. Éste es un llamado a nuestros países para crear políticas que hagan que nuestras ciudades sean lugares atractivos para vivir y colaborar, además de promover la creatividad y la cultura.  Para reforzar este proceso de creación colaborativa, hay que evitar la segregación y facilitar la igualdad de acceso a los servicios públicos de calidad. Los sistemas eficientes de transporte, los servicios de salud y las políticas de vivienda, así como una actualización de  la infraestructura digital y el acceso a la información, sólo para nombrar unos pocos, pueden hacer una diferencia crucial en la creación y mejora de oportunidades para todos, contribuyendo a la productividad y mejorando la inclusión.  En este contexto, no hay que olvidar que las comunidades locales pueden presentar diferentes demandas y potencialidades para impulsar la productividad. Además, el éxito de los proyectos de inversión que tienen un impacto en el ámbito local, puede beneficiarse de la participación de las comunidades locales.  Este desafío requiere adaptar nuestras políticas a las necesidades locales cuando sea necesario. La demanda de habilidades y la infraestructura son dos buenos ejemplos. Las exigencias del mercado laboral pueden variar en función del contexto local, mientras que el desarrollo de infraestructura permite que las economías locales atraigan inversión y contribuyan a la productividad.  ¿Qué ha hecho recientemente Chile para abordar algunas de estas cuestiones? Estos desafíos están precisamente en el centro del Programa de Gobierno que hemos puesto en marcha en los últimos dos años. Nuestro objetivo es construir un modelo social inclusivo, un crecimiento sostenido y sostenible y una democracia dinámica y participativa; todos pilares que contribuirán a convertir a Chile en un país desarrollado.  En primer lugar, la educación está en el corazón de nuestros cambios. Hemos promovido reformas para fortalecer la educación pública y las capacidades de los docentes. Junto con garantizar la no discriminación en el sistema escolar -hasta ahora arbitrariamente segregado- estamos proporcionando gradualmente la gratuidad de la enseñanza primaria, secundaria y superior.  Hemos adoptado una reforma fiscal con un doble objetivo: financiar esta nueva forma de pensar respecto a la educación y hacer que nuestra carga fiscal sea más equitativa.  Hemos promovido una reforma laboral, que aumentará la negociación colectiva y fortalecerá a los sindicatos, y aunque hemos sufrido un revés parcial en el proceso legislativo, estamos buscando nuevas formas para lograr ese propósito.  También hemos aprobado un nuevo sistema electoral para mejorar la competencia y la democracia representativa. Junto con ello, hemos introducido cambios sustanciales en el funcionamiento de los partidos políticos y mecanismos de financiación para la política como una manera de abordar nuestro déficit de transparencia y probidad.  Como marco general para este proceso, hemos puesto en marcha un debate para elaborar una nueva Constitución, que será legítima y actualizada a través de la participación ciudadana más amplia posible.  Éstas son las transformaciones más importantes, pero no las únicas. En este proceso, hemos buscado continuamente el apoyo técnico y los conocimientos fundamentales de la OCDE y de nuestros colegas, muchos de los cuales han pasado previamente por estas transformaciones. Éstos han señalado las dificultades, pero también han sido un ejemplo de cómo se puede lograr un crecimiento económico equitativo y sostenible.  Me gustaría hacer hincapié en algunos de los desafíos globales que están estrechamente relacionados con el tema de esta reunión.  Voy a empezar con el género. Soy consciente de la labor que la OCDE está haciendo en el marco de la iniciativa de género y el rol desempeñado por esta institución para dar prioridad a la cuestión de género en el G-20. Y, por otro lado, otra cuestión que hablé con el Secretario General fue cuando estaba en ONU Mujeres y llegué al Consejo Ministerial de ese momento, hablé con los ministros de Hacienda sobre las decisiones y tengo que decir que el Secretario General estuvo dando siempre un muy fuerte apoyo sobre la importancia del género en el desarrollo de la sociedad y la economía. De forma que aunque sabemos que hemos trabajado bastante en el G-20, a pesar de que estas iniciativas son notables, no son suficientes.  Todos sabemos que, a pesar de los esfuerzos realizados, continúan las brechas de género. Por lo tanto, los animo a todos a reflexionar sobre acciones e iniciativas concretas, tanto dentro de sus países como en el plano internacional –probablemente cuando discutan sobre los ODS mañana, creo, será un momento importante para hacerlo-  para así complementar el trabajo ya realizado y acercarnos a cumplir los 5 ODS, para lograr la igualdad entre los géneros y empoderar a todas las mujeres y niñas.  También me gustaría destacar la importancia del comercio para el desarrollo. Chile es un firme defensor del libre mercado y la apertura comercial. Como país pequeño, estamos convencidos de que la promoción del comercio y la inversión internacional son una de las mejores formas de estimular el crecimiento económico y, por tanto, proporcionar más oportunidades para nuestra gente.  Damos la bienvenida a la labor realizada por la OCDE respecto al comercio de valor agregado, los servicios y los acuerdos comerciales regionales. Reconocemos el hecho de que la participación de las empresas en las cadenas globales de valor son factores clave para la difusión de tecnología y esperamos nuevas investigaciones y recomendaciones en esta área.  Por último, nuestro trabajo deberá incluir activamente a nuestras comunidades. La gente exige más participación y responsabilidad de nuestros gobiernos. Ello es fundamental para fomentar la confianza en nuestro sistema político, que también afecta a la inversión y la dinámica económica. Requerimos instituciones sólidas para promover la confianza y la transparencia.  Estos desafíos globales - y los emergentes, tales como la crisis de refugiados - requieren una respuesta multidimensional y coordinada de la comunidad internacional; una respuesta común que tenga en cuenta los diversos contextos nacionales.  Para lograr este objetivo, se necesita de un sistema bien coordinado de instituciones multilaterales y cooperación internacional, con una amplia representación, así como mandatos claros e instrumentos eficaces. En este contexto, la OCDE juega un papel muy importante como organismo de normalización de políticas basadas en evidencia empírica y datos comparativos fiables.  Chile da la bienvenida a los esfuerzos de difusión de la OCDE y su objetivo de traer estándares globales y mejores prácticas a los países no miembros. Damos la bienvenida a los esfuerzos realizados en esta organización para fomentar un mayor intercambio de puntos de vista para hacer frente a los nuevos desafíos y promover el análisis y el trabajo multidimensional y horizontal.  Los resultados nos permiten captar nuestro mundo complejo y arrojar luz e identificar soluciones para los problemas que dificultan la prosperidad en nuestros países, a través del uso de herramientas nuevas e innovadoras.  Quiero también felicitar a Letonia por la exitosa conclusión de su proceso de adhesión, y esperamos dar la bienvenida a Colombia y Costa Rica, los siguientes nuevos miembros. También estamos satisfechos con el lanzamiento del Programa de ALC esta tarde, destinado a promover las buenas prácticas de la OCDE en América Latina y el Caribe.  Queridos amigos:  La productividad es un concepto multidimensional, ya que implica hacer más y mejor, ser más creativo y flexible, y tener la capacidad de anticipar y dirigir. Esto requiere de innovación, talento, adaptabilidad, participación, liderazgo y cooperación.  Estamos convencidos de que el desafío de la productividad puede ser mejor abordado, garantizando más y mejores oportunidades para todos. Mediante la reducción de las desigualdades en áreas como el acceso a una educación de calidad, oportunidades de formación, la salud, el género, el empleo de calidad o nuevas tecnologías, vamos a sumarnos todos y beneficiarnos de su contribución potencial y combinada, aumentando así la productividad, la integración y el crecimiento.  Estos dos días de intenso diálogo nos darán una excelente oportunidad para reflexionar sobre estos desafíos y fortalecer nuestras relaciones. Vemos este MCM (Reunión del Consejo Ministerial) como una invitación a trabajar, cooperar y buscar respuestas normativas para los desafíos decisivos de hoy y los de un futuro previsible. Depende de todos nosotros el tener éxito en la promoción de mejores políticas para una vida mejor.  Muchas gracias.