(Original Speech)     Excellences, ladies and gentleman:   As it has been said that by Prime Minister and also we have seen in the video, the oceans sustain life on Earth and our collective well-being. It produces half the oxygen every human being breathes, absorbs 25% of all the carbon dioxide emitted by human activities, and captures approximately 90% of the anthropogenic heat added to the global system.   But it is also central to the creation of economic wealth, with an estimated contribution of US$3 to 6 trillion to the global economy. Ninety percent of globally traded goods are transported by sea; fisheries provide 4.2 billion people with more than 15% of the animal protein consumed, and coastal areas provide crucial services for local communities.   But as we all know Oceans are already experiencing significant stress, now aggravated by increased CO2 concentrations seriously affecting marine life. Carbon dissolved in the Ocean alters its chemistry, already driving acidity up by 30% since the beginning of the industrial revolution, with severe consequences that can only increase over time with associated adverse effects for coastal and marine ecosystems.   Because climate change impacts are real and more powerful than ever, and because as you said Mr. Moderator, we have a long long coast and it is very essential in the people lives and economy, Chile is committed to preserving the Ocean. As such, we have established partnerships with other countries in several initiatives such as the “Our Ocean” Conferences and the “Because the Ocean” Declaration, along with France and Monaco, in the context of the UNFCCC.   We need to strengthen international cooperation in issues of marine protection and conservation. It is in this spirit that Chile organized the “Our Ocean” Conference in Valparaíso on October 2015, promoting action and commitments by governments, private sector, civil society, institutions, foundations, academia and others. It led to 80 new initiatives with a value of more than 2,1 billion dollars in marine protection and conservation.   And last year, of course, 23 countries signed the “Because the Ocean” Declaration, which had three objectives. First, to request the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to produce a Special Report to address the ocean/climate nexus. Second, to promote a triennial UN Ocean Conference.  Third, to promote an ocean action plan under the UNFCCC. We are pleased that all these objectives were met, with the support of many partner countries.   In Washington, in the context of the Our Ocean 2016 Conference, Chile in partnership with the National Geographic Society, convened a workshop with interested parties in order to exchange views on the links between climate and ocean. One of the thing is that the ocean has been largely absent from the climate negotiations, although it has been recognized as one of the major carbon sinks, which we have committed to “conserve and enhance”.   While progress has been made in this issue, there is indeed more to be done. Ocean related issues are integral to most Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as Prime Minister already mentioned, as well as to transition towards the inclusive “Green Economy”. But the complimentary blue element of that transition – known as “Blue Economy” – offers an innovative approach to conserving the oceans while reaping their benefits in a more equitable and sustainable way. So we believe that effectively managed MPAs support the “Blue Economy” by helping to sustain fish stocks and bolstering tourism.   Our oceans are source of life and they are been threatened. We must act.   So we have decided to lead by the example by creating marine protected areas (MPA) within our national jurisdiction. On August 24th, we formally approved the creation of the Nazca-Desventuradas Marine Protected Area in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of San Felix and San Ambrosio Islands. It covers ??300,000 square kilometers and is the largest in South America.   In parallel, together with the Rapa Nui community –Rapa Nui is Easter Island; “Rapa Nui” is on their own language- we are working to ensure that marine conservation is at the core of the new Special Territory Statute for Easter Island, currently under consultation.   Chile will host the Fourth International Marine Protected Areas Congress (IMPAC 4) in September 2017 -you are all invited to go there- with the support of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The aim of the meeting is contributing to the achievement of the goal of protecting 10% of the world´s oceans by 2020, as defined by the Convention on Biological Diversity.   Another relevant issue is marine pollution, which comes mainly from land-based sources. Therefore, in June 2016 Chile approved the Recycling Promotion Law which sets annual targets for recovery of lubricating oils, electronics, batteries, tires, and other items that have finished their productive life. It is expected that at least 30% of these wastes will be collected and recycled that they went on the ocean. The adoption of this instrument will help in this crusade and is a step forward in the establishment of a circular economy in Chile.   Likewise, Chile is working in the implementation of a New Policy to Combat Illegal Fishing, which was formally adopted on October last year. We are also implementing the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement, to which we adhered last year, and strengthening our national surveillance systems through new agreements on satellite monitoring.   We will be working strongly on this because we believe that careful management of this essential global resource is a key feature of a sustainable future. And in the end, all it depends on caring on our oceans.   And it was great to start the morning with this fantastic view.   Thank you so much.     (Traducción)      Excelencias, damas y caballeros:   Tal como ha sido señalado por la Primera Ministra y también vimos en el video, los océanos sostienen la vida en la Tierra y nuestro bienestar colectivo. Produce la mitad del oxígeno que cada ser humano respira, absorbe el 25% de todo el dióxido de carbono emitido por las actividades humanas, y capta aproximadamente el 90% del calor antropogénico añadido al sistema global.   Sin embargo, también es fundamental para la creación de riqueza económica, con una contribución estimada de US$ 3 a 6 billones de dólares para la economía mundial. El 90% de los productos comercializados mundialmente son transportados por vía marítima; el sector pesquero proporciona a 4,2 millones de personas más del 15% de la proteína animal consumida, y las zonas costeras entregan servicios cruciales para las comunidades locales.   Pero como todos sabemos, los océanos ya están experimentando un estrés significativo, ahora agravado por el aumento de las concentraciones de CO2 que afectan gravemente a la vida marina. El carbono disuelto en el océano altera su composición química, llevando ya la acidez hasta un 30% desde el comienzo de la revolución industrial, con consecuencias graves que sólo pueden aumentar con el tiempo, con efectos adversos asociados para los ecosistemas marinos y costeros.   Debido a que los efectos del cambio climático son reales y más potentes que nunca, y porque como usted dijo señor Moderador, tenemos una muy larga costa y ello es esencial en la vida de la gente y la economía, Chile está comprometido en preservar el océano. De esta forma, hemos establecido asociaciones con otros países en varias iniciativas como las Conferencias “Our Ocean” y la Declaración "Because the Ocean", junto con Francia y Mónaco, en el contexto de la Convención Marco sobre el Cambio Climático.   Necesitamos fortalecer la cooperación internacional en cuestiones de protección del medio marino y la conservación. Es en este espíritu que Chile organizó la Conferencia "Our Ocean", en Valparaíso, en octubre de 2015, promoviendo la acción y compromisos de los gobiernos, el sector privado, la sociedad civil, instituciones, fundaciones, organismos académicos y otros. Se llegó a 80 nuevas iniciativas con un valor de más de 2,1 mil millones de dólares en la protección y conservación marina.      Y el año pasado, por supuesto, 23 países firmaron la Declaración "Because the Ocean”, que tenía tres objetivos. En primer lugar, solicitar al Grupo Intergubernamental de Expertos sobre el Cambio Climático (IPCC) elaborar un Informe Especial para abordar el nexo océano/clima. En segundo lugar, promover una Conferencia Trienal de Naciones Unidas sobre el Océano. En tercer lugar, promover un Plan de Acción sobre el Océano bajo la Convención Marco sobre el Cambio Climático. Estaríamos encantados de que se cumplieran todos estos objetivos, con el apoyo de numerosos socios.   En Washington, en el contexto de la Conferencia “Our Ocean” 2016, Chile, en colaboración con la National Geographic Society, organizó un taller con las partes interesadas con el fin de intercambiar puntos de vista sobre las relaciones entre el clima y el océano. Una de las cuestiones es que el océano ha estado, en gran medida, ausente de las negociaciones sobre el clima, a pesar de que ha sido reconocido como uno de los principales sumideros de carbono, los cuales nos hemos comprometido a "conservar y mejorar".   Si bien se ha avanzado en este tema, en efecto, hay más por hacer. Las cuestiones relacionadas con los océanos son parte integral de la mayoría de los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible (ODS), como la Primera Ministra ya ha mencionado, así como para la transición hacia la integradora "Economía Verde". Pero el elemento azul de conexión de esa transición -conocido como "Economía Azul"- ofrece un enfoque innovador para la conservación de los océanos mientras se cosechan sus beneficios de manera más equitativa y sostenible. Así que creemos que las AMP (Áreas Marinas Protegidas) manejadas de forma efectiva apoyan la "Economía Azul", ayudando a mantener las poblaciones de peces y reforzar el turismo.   Nuestros océanos son fuente de vida y se les han amenazado. Hay que actuar.   Por lo tanto, hemos decidido dar el ejemplo mediante la creación de Áreas Marinas Protegidas (AMP) dentro de nuestra jurisdicción nacional. El 24 de agosto, se aprobó formalmente la creación del Área Marina Protegida Nazca-Desventuradas en la Zona Económica Exclusiva (ZEE) de las Islas San Félix y San Ambrosio. Cubre 300 mil kilómetros cuadrados y es la más grande de América del Sur.   Al mismo tiempo, junto con la comunidad Rapa Nui, - Rapa Nui es Isla de Pascua, “Rapa Nui” es en su propia lengua”- estamos trabajando para asegurar que la conservación marina esté en el centro del nuevo Estatuto de Territorio Especial de Isla de Pascua, actualmente en fase de consulta.   Chile será el anfitrión del Cuarto Congreso Internacional de Áreas Marinas Protegidas (IMPAC 4), en septiembre de 2017 –están todos invitados a ir- con el apoyo de la Unión Internacional para la Conservación de la Naturaleza (UICN). El objetivo de la reunión es contribuir a obtener la meta de proteger el 10% de los océanos del mundo al 2020, según la definición de la Convención sobre la Diversidad Biológica.   Otra cuestión relevante es la contaminación marina, que proviene principalmente de fuentes terrestres. Por eso, en junio del 2016, Chile aprobó la Ley de Promoción de Reciclaje que fija objetivos anuales para la recuperación de los aceites lubricantes, productos electrónicos, baterías, neumáticos y otros artículos que han terminado su vida productiva. Se espera recoger y reciclar al menos el 30% de estos residuos, que van a parar al océano. La adopción de este instrumento ayudará en esta cruzada y constituye un paso adelante en el establecimiento de una economía circular en Chile.   Del mismo modo, Chile está trabajando en la implementación de una Nueva Política para combatir la Pesca Ilegal, que fue adoptada formalmente el octubre del año pasado. También estamos implementando el Acuerdo de Poblaciones de Peces de Naciones Unidas, al que nos hemos adherido el año pasado, y el refuerzo de los sistemas nacionales de vigilancia a través nuevos acuerdos sobre la vigilancia por satélite.   Vamos a trabajar fuertemente en esto porque creemos que una gestión cuidadosa de este esencial recurso mundial es una característica clave de un futuro sostenible. Y al final, todo depende de que cuidemos nuestros océanos.   Y fue genial empezar la mañana con esta fantástica discusión.   Muchas gracias.