Ladies and gentleman:  I am honored to be here at the 18th Grotius lectures, which marks the beginning of the 110th annual meeting of the American Society of International Law. This lecture series, the product of a creative joint venture between ASIL and the American University Washington College of Law, is a privileged occasion to reflect upon the shifting frontiers in the world and the law, as well as to promote new ways of thinking about the challenges of the current global situation.  I am grateful to be offered this opportunity and I want to personally thank the partner institutions that have conceived and organized these Grotius Lectures: the ASIL, represented here today by its President Lori Fisler Damrosch and its Executive Director Mark David Agrast; and the AUWCL, represented today by its Dean, Claudio Grossman.  The title of this year’s ASIL annual meeting is “Charting New Frontiers in International Law”. The title itself reveals the intent to explore, discover, question and analyze where we are in relation to international law; what are the challenges; how to address what lies before us and how we can do this on the basis of the norms, principles and institutions that constitute international law.  Let me now share a few thoughts about the new frontiers of international cooperation.  I am not a lawyer; I am a physician, but there is hardly an issue in my public life that has lacked a legal dimension, in my responsibilities as a minister of State, President of the Republic of Chile and as a former Executive Secretary of UN Women.  My comments reflect my own experience in these positions of responsibility, as well as the experiences of my own country, rejecting dictatorship, rebuilding institutions in a fractured society, addressing the need to achieve a nation that provides equal opportunities and access to justice for all; institutionalizing solidarity for the weak, the poor, the elderly; not as a matter of charity, but as a valid and legitimate expectation grounded in the legal culture.  I do not use the word legitimate lightly, as President of Chile I am very much aware that legitimacy, in particular democratic legitimacy, is essential in decision-making. I don’t need to dwell much on the concept of legitimacy with this knowledgeable group. It is enough to mention the important contribution made by the late Thomas Frank, identifying the actors, the processes, the results that constitute legitimate decision-making.  Central to a prosperous world is ensuring peace and security. These concepts are embodied in the Charter of the United Nations. But these universal commitments, which are fundamental to the collective enterprise that is the United Nations, continue to prove difficult to achieve. There are more than fifteen conflicts of different intensity in the world today, which have resulted in hundreds of thousands of deaths annually.  We are also seeing that today’s conflicts are less likely to be only between sovereign entities, they now include highly militarized terrorist groups and other non-State actors. These non-State actors present new military challenges but also defy the rule of law – as they seem to act on the margins of the rules of humanitarian law in times of armed conflict.  International humanitarian law subjects the conduct of military operations to strict rules, protecting those who do not take part in hostilities. No just cause can justify violating these international norms of behavior; no just cause can justify terrorism. We see the tremendous consequences of the lack of compliance with the fundamental humanitarian values that place limits on the actions of states, no matter what sort of exceptional justification they invoke.  Our failure to maintain collective security, particularly when many combatants ignore the rules of international humanitarian law, has resulted in huge humanitarian crises. Every day the millions of refugees and people forcibly displaced grow in huge numbers.  There cannot be a more powerful metaphor for the global refugee crisis than that of the body of the child that was washed up on the shores of the Mediterranean. We saw in that poignant photograph the death of a young boy, but also the loss of the potential promise of a whole generation and the unacceptable failure of all of us collectively to prevent such tragedy. More than 20,000 children have been killed in Syria, and many more raped and tortured. More than 2 million children have been forced to leave their homes due to the current existing conflicts and UN sources suggest that more than 2.1 million children are out-of-school in Syria alone.  As an international community we need to do much more to assist the victims, to mobilize and alleviate the consequences of these conflicts. We should not accept what we are witnessing as something “normal”.  The refugee and illegal migration problem is global, but our responses tend to be national and, worse, local. We are lacking an adequate global governance to deal with global humanitarian crises. The UN institutions do what they can, but they are overwhelmed and underfinanced; and they cannot deal with interdependence challenges when the logic of international organizations is member-state based. International relations are stubbornly state-centered as power continues to spread and globalization deepens. Hence, both at the global and national level we witness a collapse of authority.  There is also lack of funding and insufficient coordination among institutions involved in humanitarian emergencies, including between the UN and NGOs. Moreover, there is a tendency to think about humanitarian emergencies only after they have erupted, instead of building resilience in advance. For governments and taxpayers it becomes easier to justify funding refugees than to finance preventive efforts. Early warning and preventive initiatives are necessary.  Latin Americans sympathize with displaced and forced migrants. The wave of dictatorships in the 70s and 80s led to the exile of thousands. In Central America, crime, drug-trafficking, natural disasters and violence force the migration of hundreds of thousands moving towards the United States, with women and unaccompanied minors becoming a growing number in this phenomenon.  But Latin America also contributed to the mitigation of some of the worst crises in the past. Thousands of Spanish, Portuguese, Italian and other European citizens escaping dictatorship and fleeing war and repression in Europe benefited from open door policies in Latin America. Our region also received large numbers of Arab and Jewish immigrants, whose descendants are an integral and successful part of our societies. There are more citizens of Lebanese origin in Brazil than in the Lebanon. The largest Palestinian community outside the Middle East can be found in Chile.  I appreciate the efforts many countries are making to welcome and support refugees; but we must all do our share collectively and as individual nations. This is why my Government has decided to receive refugees from the civil war in Syria and is working with UNHCR to find the resources to receive refugee families in our country, at the earliest possible date. This is also why, as I announced in my speech before the General Assembly in September 2015, Chile will increase its participation in UN peacekeeping operations, including in Africa.  The reasons for our continued inability to achieve peace and security are many; among others: lack of agreement in a Security Council that requires reforms; the rise of new actors that do not feel they are bound by the norms of the use of force; and a broad interpretation of the norms on self-defense.  We will insist on the need to comply with and to update the norms laid down in the Charter of United Nations and International Humanitarian Law and in the achievement of collective security. But we need to address conflict from a broader perspective of peace and security.  In this regard, I highlight and share the opinion of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who said last September that “Over the longer term, the biggest threat to terrorists is not the power of missiles - it is the politics of inclusion [...]. It is education, jobs and real opportunity.”  We need to make serious efforts to promote inclusive and sustainable development as it will be the most effective tool for preventing future conflict, to build peace, to consolidate democracy and the rule of law, to safeguard individual freedom and, ultimately, to enable all people to live a life with dignity and productiveness in a fair society.  I have addressed the Security Council on the need to highlight the relevance of the goals of inclusive development to deal with conflicts and to consolidate peace once it is secured.  The development issues confronting the world are serious and require collective action.  Access to good schools, healthcare, electricity, safe water and other critical services remains elusive for many people, often determined by socioeconomic status, gender, ethnicity, and geography.  Runaway inequality has created a world where 62 people own as much as the poorest half of the world's population. In accordance to a recent Oxfam Report, half of the World’s Wealth is now in hands of 1% of the population. The wealth of the poorest half of the world's population, I’m talking about 3.6 billion people, has fallen by a trillion dollars since 2010. This drop has occurred despite the global population increasing by around 400 million people during that period.  Today more than one in six people worldwide - 894 million - don't have access to sufficient freshwater and 2.5 billion people, including almost one billion children, live without basic sanitation.  The lack of sanitation leads to the death of a child every 20 seconds—that’s 1.5 million preventable deaths each year.  According to the UNICEF, another 1.5 million children die annually from diseases that can be prevented by immunization. Public health and development threats are made even worse by global environmental threats, particularly global warming, that raise serious medium term risks to the future quality of life of all people.  These development challenges are daunting, but I believe that through collective action, we can address and mitigate them.  In this regard, 2015 may be viewed as a milestone in our efforts to focus on sustainable development.  We came together in Paris to create a new and promising path toward slowing and eventually reversing climate change. This was a remarkable outcome that reflects the commitment of all countries to tackle this most significant environment and development challenge.  In this context, last October we hosted the second “Our Ocean” Conference in Valparaíso, in Chile. This initiative, led by Chile and the United States, seeks to promote conservation and sustainability of our ocean as a key instrument to control climate change. At the conference, important commitments were undertaken to implement policies to protect the ocean, as well as to create marine protected areas, which will play a key role in climate change mitigation and adaptation by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The meeting in Valparaiso also allowed for the establishment of an alliance of states and non-governmental actors.  Chile played a leading role at the COP21, highlighting the importance of the ocean for regulating weather and climate, as well as its capacity as a carbon sink. These concepts were successfully introduced in the Paris Agreement, as was the inclusion of human rights and gender perspective language, underscoring the social dimension of climate change. Chile and Brazil also led the efforts to achieve a common Latin American and Caribbean position at the COP21.  As for our nationally determined contribution (NDC), Chile has pledged to reduce by 2030 its carbon intensity by 30% and that these figures could rise to a range of 35 to 40%, if we have international technical support. This national commitment was validated through a wide public consultation and constitutes an ambitious and fair effort in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.  In addition to the Paris Agreement, last year the international community succeeded in forging a broad 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (or SDGs). These SDGs are integrated, indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental. This constitutes a global plan of action to ensure the eradication of poverty, resiliency, and prosperity for people and the planet.  The Agenda embraces an approach that we share and enthusiastically support. An approach based on the equality within and among countries; and between men and women; sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic growth; and protection of the environment and the pursuit of social stability and peace. These values lay the foundation for the collective pursuit of the SDGs.  Primary responsibility for achieving sustainable and more equal development must ultimately rest with each individual country. Chile is committed to this task. But we also must recognize that achieving inclusive development is affected by global dynamics.The development challenges that we face today cannot be resolved by each country in isolation.  In Chile, we are making great efforts to narrow social gaps and prevent segments of the population from being left behind, closing gaps in education, in income and position in the social structure. It is not only a moral imperative –it’s a moral imperative, but it’s not only a moral imperative- but also a requirement for medium and long-term development, political stability and peace.  And allows me to make special mention of the need to end discrimination and create opportunities for women; women, who in most societies are the central players in effectively achieving sustainable development. The exclusion of such a significant part of the population makes it not only difficult but often actually impossible to achieve development goals.  We have two major positive obligations to fulfill in this regard: we need to foster gender equality, and to empower all women and girls. This means to end all forms of discrimination against women and girls everywhere; eliminate all forms of violence and harmful practices in the public and private spheres. This is a call for a promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family.  This is also a commitment to eliminate gender disparities in education in order to ensure equal access to all levels of education. These are the pillars upon which we can build a full and effective participation in order to achieve equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life.  As noted above, the complexity of these development issues in an interconnected world require solutions rooted in international cooperation. No country--no matter how powerful—is immune to these problems nor can they solve them by building walls, real or metaphorical.  Solutions to these problems cannot be reached unless we confront them together.  Fortunately, we have a foundation to support the international community in confronting these challenges through the rule of law and the contributions of international law beginning with the many contributions of Hugo Grotius, the founding father of International Law:  History - claimed Grotius - provide two tools for lawyers: on the one hand provides us with examples, on the other, it provides us with the judgment that different people formed about certain facts. These truths are valid not only for lawyers, but for all of us.  Grotius wrote at the time in which the temporal and the secular powers were crumbling in the old Europe: it was the collapse of the traditional power of the Papacy and the Holy Roman Empire.  From being an exile and political refugee, he eventually became the father of modern International Law. In a time when wars hampered the effectiveness of the Law, Grotius theorized a solution: International Law is the tool to achieve social order and peace, to limit the old principles of violence and fatalities, and promote solutions based on reason and justice.  Perhaps his most impressive contribution was to propose that we do not adopt decisions on an ad hoc basis, resorting just to considerations dictated by circumstances. His idea was to find principles that would capture the needs of the world in a given time and make them an essential component of legitimate decision-making.  In facing the challenges confronting human kind we need to go back to these foundations of international law. We need to recommit ourselves to the importance of legitimate decision-making based on international legal norms, institutions and principles. Ad hoc decision-making based on short-term exigencies will not lead to security in a multipolar and interconnected world like the one we live in.  We need to reiterate, to commit ourselves, to strengthen and insist on the validity of art. 2, part 4 of the Charter of the UN: No to the use of force and no to war. For some this could appear to be too idealistic, motivated only by good, but impractical, feelings. To them I reiterate what I have always thought. We have no other option than to insist on a commitment to peace, to mobilize people to ensure compliance to these norms, to reject a situation where we all get accustomed to the inevitability of war and conflict.  My own country has contributed to the pursuit of peace, to the rejection of the use of force, to the non-acceptance of war. Despite being a small country, Chile has participated in peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Cambodia, Timor Leste, Cyprus, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other countries.  Even before the creation of the United Nations, Chile played an active role in maintaining regional peace. When the United States invaded Veracruz in 1914, Argentina, Brazil and Chile – the so-called ABC Powers- met in Niagara Falls and offered to mediate between both countries. The Niagara Falls Peace Conference prevented a war and achieved a peaceful solution to the crisis.  Closer to the present, during the border conflict between Peru and Ecuador in 1995, Chile as one of the four guarantors of the 1942 Rio de Janeiro Protocol, played a crucial role in achieving a cease-fire and in the negotiation of the 1998 peace accord.  Chile is a country that has strengthened its role in the multilateral system. In 2014 and 2015, we were a non-permanent member of the Security Council. In light of this experience, we wish to reaffirm our belief in the need to reform the Council by increasing the number of its permanent members without extending veto power, or at least in not using it in cases of crimes against humanity. Such a reform is necessary, reflecting the considerable progress made in the multilateral system, and would undoubtedly confer greater legitimacy on the most important organ of the United Nations.  Let us, as I argued before the Security Council, also recommit to the goal of inclusive development as a key strategy for the maintenance of international peace and security. There is a particularly worrying situation in multinational, multiethnic and multicultural States in which the rights of minorities are not respected and in those where powerful minorities oppress weak and dispersed majorities.  Frustration and rancor among oppressed minorities create propitious conditions for radicalization and armed violence. When it occurs, this usually causes incalculable suffering that crosses national frontiers and can even destabilize entire regions.  Latin America, which is the region of the world with the most inequality, is also the region with the highest homicide rate and one of the regions most affected by drug trafficking and organized crime. This does not look like mere coincidence.  We are committed to peace and integration in our Latin American region. This is why Chile is one of the four countries accompanying and facilitating the current peace talks in Colombia. Colombians have suffered a decades-long armed conflict that has caused more than 200,000 victims, mostly civilians, and about 5.7 million people displaced. At present, the peace process between the Colombian government and the FARC guerrilla is about to yield a positive and definite result. Chile has already committed to participate with military personnel in the verification process in the post-conflict, according to what was decided by the UN Security Council in response to a Colombian government request. Peace is near in Colombia and Chile will be part of that process. Chile has also been a proactive and leading participant in all integration efforts attempted in the region and in the South American subregion.  Along with our network of bilateral agreements with Latin American and other neighbors, we are seeking a closer understanding between the two main economic blocs, the Pacific Alliance and MERCOSUR; not to merge both groups, but to pragmatically agree on a common action plan which might allow us to reap more political and economic advantages in global society.  Chile intends to build bricks on which to reach a stronger regional integration. It is convergence in diversity. We are aware of our region’s diversity, but we must be able to also identify what unites us and how we can integrate our ideas, our perspectives, and our economies.  Chile is also helping less developed countries to strive towards inclusive development, particularly in Central America and the Caribbean. South – South cooperation is one of our priorities and a moral responsibility. For the last few years, the “Chile Fund against Hunger and Poverty” has financed cooperation projects throughout the world, from the Nelson Mandela scholarships that we created to fund graduate work by African citizens in Chilean universities, to judicial reform and police training in the Northern Triangle of Central America, to mention to a few examples.  Ladies and gentlemen:  Grotius offers us wisdom for these times. Writing also at a time when social stability was under pressure, Grotius had the intuition that individuals, in order to coexist, had the only option to gather together (appetitus societatis). With a view to a common advantage, they form political communities, peaceful and organized - these are the Sovereign States- whose sovereignty derives from the human will of each individual, and whose purpose lies in justice and in peace.  In line with this, we maintain that conflict prevention, peace-building, construction of democratic institutions and development require the participation of all stakeholders.  International law has created a powerful universal narrative of human dignity; it includes due process, the rule of law, freedom of expression, religious freedom, the principle of nondiscrimination and other civil and political, as well as economic, social and cultural rights.  This narrative of rights has been embodied at the universal and regional levels in treaties and supervisory organs and regional courts. UN supervisory bodies and the International Criminal Court have also established individual responsibility in addition to state responsibility.  In our region, international law has been present since the early years of independence. Doctrines criticizing ordinary practices of the time emerged in the hemisphere and had been part of our political and institutional life ever since.  Andrés Bello, one of the most eminent jurists of Latin America and one of the intellectual founding fathers of my country, left his footprints in civil law, constitutional law and in the famous Principles of International Law.    Important contributions to the conception of human rights emerged with the pioneer adoption of the American Declaration of Rights and Duties of Man of 1948, which preceded the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  Founding fathers of international law in the continent, such as Alejandro Álvarez, Carlos Calvo and José María Drago, raised their voices in favor of the juridical equality among States and the universal force of international law.   Guided by these lessons, the region has been able to achieve important developments in international economic law, law of the sea and in human rights law.  The decisions of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, for example, the right of petition, the protection of victims, the revision of the competence of military courts in judging civilians or the relationship between contempt laws and freedom of expression or regarding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, are signs of a solid engagement with universal values.  These decisions and others have been crucial for the expansion of human dignity and freedoms in a country like mine that prides itself in its compliance with international obligations.  We, like all countries, must understand that the process of ensuring human dignity is permanent and we must recommit to adopting and meeting our international obligations. Based on my experience, when we witness gross violations of human rights and we do not act, more likely than not we will end up facing the instability of fractured societies, polarization, with all of the spillover effects on peace, security, and economic development.  We thus all have to work together to accept the compulsory application of these fundamental human rights norms without reservations. This would, in my view, have a preventive character as decisions of the supervisory bodies not only address past actions but also have a deterrent effect in the future.   In our international community, a basic prerequisite for promoting effective solutions is to strengthen the system of global institutions and multilateral cooperation, with broad representation, clear mandates and effective tools.  We realize that we are all responsible for ensuring that the international system works properly. One essential element is the principle of adherence to international law, which includes strict respect for treaties as a means of guaranteeing peace and international stability. This requires respecting what has been agreed, and not misusing the mechanisms that have been designed for peacefully resolving any differences that may exist. The abuse of international tribunals for artificial lawsuits could contribute to the erosion of these existing mechanisms.  Grotius argues that Natural Law as a universal standard shall never fail - it represents the highest authority regulating relations between States.  This is the greatest heritage of Grotius: "pacta sunt servanda", which consists in the obligation that agreements must be kept. This is a core principle of international law, upon which the civil coexistence among individuals is based, and upon which we still can build solutions to crisis in the international community.  As Andrés Bello stated, “the rules established by reason or by mutual consent are the only ones that can serve to settle the differences between sovereign entities”.  The development of international law has strengthened the legal standing of the Pacta sunt servanda principle, through the inclusion of other principles added to the international law of treaties.  One of those principles is the one that states that no State can invoke its domestic law as a means to not comply with this source of law.  We know that since its inception, international law depends on the will of its subjects and that compliance depends on the fair behavior of those who are bound by its norms. This is why my country has enshrined in our constitution the convergence of the above-mentioned principles, which provide certitude to the fulfillment of international obligations by Chile.  These are the old and new challenges that international law poses to our states. These sentiments and commitments should guide our action and our duty to build a better world—one in which there is better balance between development and preservation of our environment, more justice, cohesion, equality and dignity in our societies and among our nations. Thank you very much.     (Traducción)     Señoras y señores:   Es un honor para mí estar aquí presentando la Decimoctava Conferencia Grotius, que marca el inicio de la 110° Reunión Anual de la Sociedad Norteamericana de Derecho Internacional (ASIL). Esta serie de conferencias, producto de una cooperación creativa entre la ASIL y la Facultad de Derecho de la American University en Washington, D.C. es una ocasión privilegiada para reflexionar acerca de las fronteras en continuo cambio del mundo y del Derecho, así como para fomentar nuevas formas de pensar acerca de los desafíos que nos presenta la situación global actual.   Agradezco la oportunidad que me han brindado y quisiera también expresar personalmente mi gratitud a las instituciones asociadas que concibieron y organizaron estas conferencias Grotius: la ASIL, aquí representada hoy por su Presidenta, Lori Fisler Damrosch, y su Director Ejecutivo, Mark David Agrast; y la AUWCL, aquí representada por su Decano, Claudio Grossman.   El título de la reunión anual de la ASIL este año es “Nuevas Fronteras del Derecho Internacional”. El título en sí mismo deja traslucir la determinación de estudiar más a fondo, descubrir, cuestionar y analizar dónde estamos en relación con el Derecho Internacional; cuáles son los desafíos; cómo abordar lo que se viene y cómo hacerlo en función de las normas, principios e instituciones que constituyen el Derecho Internacional.   Permítanme compartir algunas reflexiones propias sobre las nuevas fronteras de la cooperación internacional. No soy abogada; soy médico cirujana, pero prácticamente no hay ningún asunto de mi vida pública que no haya tenido una dimensión jurídica, en mis responsabilidades como Ministra de Estado, Presidenta de la República de Chile o como ex Secretaria Ejecutiva de ONU Mujeres.   Mis comentarios reflejan mi experiencia personal en estos cargos de responsabilidad, así como las experiencias de mi propio país, al rechazar la dictadura, reconstruir las instituciones en una sociedad fracturada, ocuparse de la necesidad de lograr una nación que da iguales oportunidades de acceso a la justicia para todos; institucionalizar la solidaridad para los débiles, los pobres y las personas de la tercera edad, no sólo como un tema de caridad, sino que también como una expectativa válida y legítima firmemente basada en la cultura jurídica.   No empleo el término legítimo en forma superficial, como Presidenta de Chile estoy muy consciente de que la legitimidad, en particular la legitimidad democrática, es esencial en la toma de decisiones. No necesito hacer mucho hincapié en el concepto de legitimidad ante este grupo de personas bien informadas. Sólo basta mencionar la importante contribución del ya fallecido Thomas Frank, quien identifica a los actores, procesos y resultados que constituyen la toma de decisiones legítima.   Lo medular para un mundo próspero es asegurar la paz y la seguridad. Estos conceptos están contenidos en la Carta de las Naciones Unidas.   Sin embargo, sigue resultando difícil lograr estos compromisos universales con la paz y la seguridad, tan fundamentales para el proyecto colectivo que es las Naciones Unidas.   Hoy en día, existen más de quince conflictos bélicos de diferente intensidad en el mundo, los que han ocasionado cientos de miles de muertes al año.   También estamos viendo que es menos probable que los conflictos actuales sean sólo entre entidades soberanas; ahora incluyen grupos terroristas altamente militarizados y otros actores no estatales. Estos actores no estatales no sólo plantean nuevos desafíos en términos militares, sino que también emplazan al Estado de Derecho – puesto que parecen actuar especialmente al margen de las reglas del derecho humanitario en tiempos de conflicto armado.   El Derecho Humanitario Internacional somete la conducción de las operaciones militares a reglas estrictas, protegiendo a aquellos que no participan en las hostilidades. Ninguna causa justa puede justificar la violación de estas normas internacionales de conducta; ninguna causa justa puede justificar el terrorismo. Vemos las enormes consecuencias que acarrea el incumplimiento de los valores humanitarios fundamentales que restringen las acciones de los estados, sin importar qué tipo de justificación excepcional se invoque.   Nuestro fracaso en mantener la seguridad colectiva, en especial cuando muchos combatientes pasan por alto las reglas del Derecho Humanitario Internacional, ha redundado en enormes crisis humanitarias. Día a día se multiplica la cantidad de los millones de refugiados y personas desplazadas a la fuerza.   No puede haber una metáfora más potente para la crisis global de refugiados que la fotografía de un niño arrojado en la playa por las olas del Mediterráneo. En esa conmovedora imagen, vimos no sólo la muerte de un joven; también vimos la pérdida de la promesa potencial de toda una generación y el fracaso inaceptable de todos nosotros, en conjunto, en evitar esa tragedia.   Más de 20 mil niños han muerto sólo en Siria, y muchos más han sido violados y torturados. Más de 2 millones de niños se han visto obligados a abandonar sus hogares a causa de los actuales conflictos armados; por otro lado, fuentes de la ONU indican que sólo en Siria más de 2,1 millones de niños no asisten a la escuela.   Como comunidad mundial necesitamos hacer mucho más para auxiliar a las víctimas, movilizar a la comunidad internacional y aliviar las consecuencias de estos conflictos. No debemos aceptar lo que estamos presenciando como algo “normal”.   El problema de los refugiados y la migración ilegal es global, pero nuestras respuestas tienden a ser nacionales y, peor aún, locales. Carecemos de un gobierno global adecuado para ocuparnos de las crisis humanitarias globales. Las instituciones de las Naciones Unidas hacen lo que pueden, pero están agobiadas y padecen de financiamiento insuficiente; además, no pueden ocuparse de los desafíos de interdependencia cuando la lógica de las organizaciones internacionales se basa en los Estados miembros. El Estado sigue siendo porfiadamente la base de las relaciones internacionales a medida que el poder continúa expandiéndose y se profundiza la globalización. Por consiguiente, tanto a nivel global como nacional, presenciamos un derrumbe de la autoridad.   Por otra parte, también existe una falta de financiamiento e insuficiente coordinación entre las instituciones involucradas en las emergencias humanitarias, incluso entre la ONU y las ONG. Asimismo, existe una tendencia a pensar en las emergencias humanitarias sólo después de que hayan ocurrido, en lugar de fortalecer la resiliencia de antemano. Es más fácil para los gobiernos y contribuyentes justificar el financiamiento de los refugiados que financiar los esfuerzos preventivos. Se requiere de iniciativas preventivas y alertas tempranas.   Los latinoamericanos solidarizamos con los desplazados y los emigrantes forzados. La ola de dictaduras de las décadas de 1970 y 1980 llevó al exilio a miles de nuestros ciudadanos. En Centroamérica, la delincuencia, el narcotráfico, los desastres naturales y la violencia obligan a emigrar a cientos de miles de personas que se trasladan hacia Estados Unidos, un fenómeno en el cual aumenta cada vez más la cantidad de mujeres y menores no acompañados.   Sin embargo, América Latina también contribuyó a mitigar algunas de las peores crisis del pasado. Miles de españoles, portugueses, italianos y otros ciudadanos europeos que huían de la dictadura, la guerra y la represión en Europa se beneficiaron de las políticas de puertas abiertas latinoamericanas. Nuestra región también acogió a numerosos inmigrantes árabes y judíos, cuya descendencia forma parte integral y exitosa de nuestras sociedades. Hay más ciudadanos de origen libanés en Brasil que en el Líbano. La mayor comunidad palestina fuera de Medio Oriente se encuentra en Chile.   Valoro los esfuerzos que muchos países están haciendo por aceptar y apoyar a los refugiados, pero todos debemos poner de nuestra parte en forma colectiva y como naciones individuales. Por esta razón, mi Gobierno ha decidido aceptar refugiados de la guerra civil en Siria y está trabajando con la ACNUR para encontrar los recursos a fin de recibir a familias de refugiados en nuestro país lo antes posible. Por esta misma razón, como lo anuncié en mi discurso ante la Asamblea General en septiembre del año 2015, Chile aumentará su participación en las operaciones de la ONU para el mantenimiento de la paz, incluidas aquellas en África.   Las causas de nuestra prolongada incapacidad para lograr la paz y la seguridad son muchas; entre otras, la falta de acuerdo en un Consejo de Seguridad que requiere reformas; la aparición de nuevos actores que no se sienten obligados por las normas sobre el uso de la fuerza, y la interpretación amplia de las normas de autodefensa.   Insistiremos en la necesidad de acatar y actualizar las normas establecidas en la Carta de las Naciones Unidas en el Derecho Humanitario Internacional y en el logro de la seguridad colectiva.   Necesitamos, sin embargo, encargarnos de las contiendas desde una perspectiva más amplia de la paz y la seguridad.   En esta relación, destaco y comparto la opinión del Secretario General de la ONU Ban Ki-moon, quien manifestó en septiembre pasado que “En el largo plazo, la mayor amenaza a los terroristas no es el poder de los misiles -es la política de inclusión [...]. Es la educación, los empleos y las oportunidades reales.” Necesitamos hacer un esfuerzo serio para fomentar el desarrollo inclusivo y sostenible como la herramienta más efectiva para evitar conflictos futuros, para construir la paz, para consolidar la democracia y el estado de Derecho, para salvaguardar las libertades individuales y, en última instancia, para permitir que todas las personas vivan una vida digna y productiva en una sociedad justa.   Me he dirigido al Consejo de Seguridad en relación con la necesidad de resaltar la pertinencia de las metas de desarrollo inclusivo para abordar los conflictos y consolidar la paz una vez que se haya logrado.   Los problemas de desarrollo que enfrentan al mundo son serios y requieren de acción colectiva. Para muchos, sigue siendo esquivo el acceso a buenas escuelas, salud, electricidad, el agua segura y otros servicios críticos, lo que a menudo es determinado por la condición socioeconómica, de género, grupo étnico y la geografía.   La desigualdad descontrolada ha creado un mundo en el cual 62 personas poseen el mismo dinero que la mitad más pobre de la población mundial. De acuerdo con un informe reciente de Oxfam, en la actualidad la mitad de la riqueza mundial pertenece al 1% de la población. La riqueza de la mitad más pobre de la población mundial, estoy hablando de alrededor de 3 mil 600 millones de personas, ha disminuido en un billón de dólares desde el año 2010. Esta caída se produjo a pesar de que la población mundial aumentó en cerca de 400 millones de personas durante ese período.   Hoy en día, más de una de cada seis personas en el mundo - lo que equivale a 894 millones de personas – carece de acceso a suficiente agua dulce y 2 mil 500 millones de personas, incluidos casi mil millones de niños, viven sin servicios de salud básicos. La falta de servicios de salud redunda en la muerte de un niño cada 20 segundos, es decir, un millón y medio de muertes evitables cada año.   De acuerdo con la UNICEF, otro millón y medio de niños muere anualmente a causa de enfermedades que pueden evitarse mediante la inmunización. Las amenazas a la salud pública y al desarrollo empeoran aún más a causa de las amenazas ambientales a nivel global, en especial el calentamiento global, que plantea graves riesgos a mediano plazo para la futura calidad de vida de todas las personas.   Estos desafíos del desarrollo son intimidantes; sin embargo, creo que a través de la acción colectiva, podemos hacernos cargo de ellos y mitigarlos. En este sentido, el año 2015 puede considerarse como un hito en nuestros esfuerzos por abordar el desarrollo sostenible.   Nos reunimos en París con el objeto de crear una trayectoria nueva y alentadora para ralentizar y a la larga revertir el cambio climático. Este fue un resultado notable que refleja el compromiso de todos los países para abordar el desafío más significativo del medio ambiente y del desarrollo.   En este contexto, en octubre pasado fuimos anfitriones de la Segunda Conferencia “Nuestro Océano” en Valparaíso, en Chile. Esta iniciativa, liderada por Chile y Estados Unidos, busca fomentar la conservación y sostenibilidad de nuestros mares como instrumento principal para controlar el cambio climático. En la conferencia, se asumieron importantes compromisos a fin de implementar políticas para proteger los océanos, así como para crear áreas marinas protegidas, las que desempeñarán un papel clave en mitigar y adaptar el cambio climático reduciendo las emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero. La reunión en Valparaíso también permitió establecer una alianza de Estados y actores no gubernamentales.   Chile desempeñó un papel destacado en la COP21, resaltando la importancia del océano para regular el tiempo y el clima, y al mismo tiempo su capacidad como sumidero de carbono. Estos conceptos fueron incorporados con éxito en el Acuerdo de París, al igual que la inclusión del lenguaje sobre los derechos humanos y la perspectiva de género, lo que pone de relieve la dimensión social del cambio climático. Chile y Brasil también lideraron los esfuerzos para que América Latina y el Caribe lograran una postura común frente a la COP21.   En relación con nuestra contribución determinada nacionalmente (NDC), Chile se ha comprometido a reducir sus emisiones de carbono en un 30% de aquí al año 2030, y a aumentar estas cifras a un rango de 35 a 40%, si contamos con apoyo técnico internacional. Este compromiso nacional fue validado mediante una amplia consulta pública y constituye un esfuerzo ambicioso y justo en conformidad con el principio de responsabilidades comunes pero diferenciadas.   Además del Acuerdo de París el año pasado, la comunidad internacional tuvo éxito en elaborar una amplia Agenda 2030 para el Desarrollo Sostenible, la que incluye diecisiete Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible (ODS). Estos ODS son integrados, indivisibles, y equilibran las tres dimensiones del desarrollo sostenible: la económica, la social y la medioambiental.   Lo anterior constituye un plan de acción global para asegurar la erradicación de la pobreza, resiliencia y prosperidad para las personas y el planeta.   La Agenda adopta un enfoque que compartimos y apoyamos con entusiasmo. Un enfoque basado en la igualdad dentro de los países y entre ellos; y entre hombres y mujeres; el crecimiento económico sostenible, inclusivo y equitativo; así como la protección del medio ambiente y la búsqueda de la estabilidad y paz social. Estos valores sentaron las bases de la búsqueda colectiva de los ODS.   La responsabilidad primordial de alcanzar un desarrollo sostenible más igualitario debe competer a cada país. Chile se ha comprometido con entusiasmo a esta tarea. Debemos reconocer, sin embargo, que el logro del desarrollo inclusivo también se ve afectado por la dinámica global. Los desafíos de desarrollo que enfrentamos hoy en día no pueden ser resueltos por cada país en forma aislada.   En Chile, estamos haciendo grandes esfuerzos por acortar las brechas sociales y evitar que segmentos de la población se queden atrás, cerrando brechas en educación, el ingreso y la ubicación en la estructura social. No sólo es un imperativo moral –es un imperativo moral, no sólo eso- sino que también es un requisito para el desarrollo, la estabilidad política y la paz a mediano y largo plazo   Ahora, permítanme mencionar en forma especial la necesidad de terminar con la discriminación y crear oportunidades para la mujer, quien en la mayoría de las sociedades es el actor central en lograr efectivamente el desarrollo sostenible. La exclusión de una parte tan significativa de la población no sólo dificulta, sino que a menudo hace realmente imposible lograr los objetivos de desarrollo.   Tenemos dos importantes obligaciones positivas que cumplir en este respecto: necesitamos fomentar la igualdad de género y empoderar a todas las mujeres y niñas. Esto significa terminar con todas las formas de discriminación contra todas las mujeres y niñas en todo lugar; eliminar todas las formas de violencia y todas las prácticas dañinas en las esferas pública y privada. Éste es un llamado a promover la responsabilidad compartida al interior del hogar y la familia.   Es, asimismo, imperativo eliminar las disparidades de género en la educación a fin de asegurar el acceso igualitario a todos los niveles educativos. Éstos son los pilares sobre los cuales podemos construir una participación plena y efectiva a fin de lograr la igualdad de oportunidades de liderazgo en todos los niveles de toma de decisiones en la vida política, económica y pública.   Como señalé anteriormente, la complejidad de estos problemas de desarrollo en un mundo interconectado requiere de soluciones arraigadas en la cooperación internacional. Ningún país, sin importar su poderío, es inmune a estos problemas ni puede resolverlos construyendo muros, reales o metafóricos. Las soluciones de estos problemas no pueden lograrse salvo que los enfrentemos mancomunadamente.   Afortunadamente, disponemos de una base para apoyar a la comunidad internacional al enfrentar estos desafíos mediante el estado de Derecho y los aportes del derecho internacional, comenzando por las numerosas contribuciones de Hugo Grotius, el padre del Derecho Internacional:   La historia, aseveró Grotius, proporciona dos herramientas a los abogados: por una parte aporta ejemplos; por otra, proporciona la opinión que distintas personas se formaron acerca de determinados hechos.   Estas verdades son válidas no solo para los abogados, sino que para todos nosotros.   Grotius escribió en la época en que se desintegraban los poderes temporales y seculares en la antigua Europa: era el derrumbe del poder tradicional del Papado y del Sagrado Imperio Romano.   Con el tiempo, de ser un exiliado y refugiado político pasó a convertirse en el padre del Derecho Internacional moderno. En una época en que las guerras obstaculizaban la efectividad de la ley, Grotius teorizó una solución: El Derecho Internacional emerge como la herramienta para lograr el orden social y la paz, limitar los antiguos principios de la violencia y la muerte, y fomentar soluciones basadas en la razón y la justicia.   Tal vez, su contribución más impresionante fue proponer que no se tomaran decisiones en forma ad hoc, recurriendo sólo a las consideraciones dictadas por las circunstancias. Su idea fue encontrar principios que recogieran las necesidades del mundo en una época determinada y transformarlos en un componente esencial de la legítima toma de decisiones.   Al hacer frente a los desafíos que confrontan a la humanidad, necesitamos retomar estos fundamentos del Derecho Internacional. Necesitamos renovar nuestro compromiso con la importancia de la legítima toma de decisiones, basada en normas, instituciones y principios jurídicos internacionales. La toma de decisiones ad hoc basada en exigencias de corto plazo no nos conducirá a la seguridad en un mundo multipolar e interconectado como aquel en que vivimos.   Necesitamos reiterar, comprometernos, fortalecer e insistir en la validez del art. 2, párrafo 4 de la Carta de la ONU: No al uso de la fuerza y no a la guerra. Para algunos, esto podría parecer demasiado idealista, motivado solo por sentimientos buenos pero poco prácticos. A ellos les reitero lo que siempre he pensado. No tenemos ninguna otra opción más que insistir en nuestro compromiso con la paz, movilizar a las personas para asegurar el cumplimiento de estas normas, rechazar una situación en la que nos hemos acostumbrado a la inevitabilidad de la guerra y el conflicto.   Mi propio país ha contribuido a la búsqueda de la paz, al rechazo del uso de la fuerza y a la no aceptación de la guerra. A pesar de ser un país pequeño, Chile ha participado en las operaciones de mantenimiento de la paz en Haití, Camboya, Timor Leste, Chipre, Bosnia y Herzegovina, además de otros países.   Incluso antes de la creación de las Naciones Unidas, Chile desempeñó un papel activo en la mantención de la paz en la región. Cuando Estados Unidos invadió Veracruz en 1914, Argentina, Brasil y Chile – las así llamadas Potencias ABC- se reunieron en las Cataratas del Niágara y ofrecieron mediar entre ambos países. La Conferencia de Paz de las Cataratas del Niágara evitó una guerra y logró una solución pacífica de la crisis.   Más recientemente, durante el conflicto limítrofe entre Perú y Ecuador en 1995, Chile, en calidad de uno de los cuatro garantes del Protocolo de Río de Janeiro de 1942, desempeñó un papel decisivo en lograr un cese al fuego y en la negociación del acuerdo de paz de 1998.   Chile es un país que ha fortalecido su papel en el sistema multilateral. En 2014 y 2015, fuimos miembro no permanente del Consejo de Seguridad. A la luz de esta experiencia, deseamos reafirmar nuestra convicción de la necesidad de reformar el Consejo, aumentando el número de miembros permanentes sin ampliar el derecho de veto, o al menos sin utilizarlo en casos de crímenes de lesa humanidad. Tal reforma es necesaria para reflejar el avance sustancial logrado en el sistema multilateral, y sin duda otorgaría mayor legitimidad al órgano más importante de las Naciones Unidas.   Permítannos, tal como sostuve en el Consejo de Seguridad, también renovar nuestro compromiso con el objetivo de desarrollo inclusivo como una estrategia clave para mantener la paz y seguridad internacionales. Hay una situación especialmente preocupante en los Estados multinacionales y multiétnicos donde no se respetan los derechos de las minorías y en aquellos en que las minorías poderosas oprimen a las mayorías débiles y dispersas.   La frustración y el resentimiento entre las minorías oprimidas crean condiciones propicias para la radicalización y la violencia armada. Cuando esto sucede, por lo general causa un sufrimiento incalculable que traspasa las fronteras nacionales y puede incluso desestabilizar a regiones enteras.   América Latina, que es la región que mantiene la mayor desigualdad del mundo, es también la región con la mayor tasa de homicidios y una de las más afectadas por el tráfico de drogas y el crimen organizado. Esto no pareciera ser una mera coincidencia.   Estamos comprometidos con la paz e integración en nuestra región latinoamericana. Por esta razón, Chile es uno de los cuatro países que acompañan y facilitan las actuales conversaciones de paz en Colombia. Los colombianos han sufrido un conflicto armado durante décadas, el que ha provocado más de 200 mil víctimas, en su mayoría civiles, y cerca de 5,7 millones de desplazados. Hoy en día, el proceso de paz entre el gobierno colombiano y la guerrilla de las FARC está próximo a dar un resultado positivo y concluyente. Chile ya se ha comprometido a participar con personal militar en el proceso de verificación ulterior al conflicto, de acuerdo con lo decidido por el Consejo de Seguridad de la ONU en respuesta a una solicitud del gobierno colombiano. La paz está próxima en Colombia y Chile será parte de ese proceso.   Chile además ha sido un participante proactivo y protagónico en todas las iniciativas de integración intentadas en la región y en la subregión sudamericana.   Junto con nuestra red de acuerdos bilaterales con vecinos latinoamericanos y otros, estamos procurando un mayor entendimiento entre los dos principales bloques económicos, la Alianza del Pacífico y el MERCOSUR; no para fusionar ambos grupos, sino que para acordar pragmáticamente un plan de acción común que nos permita cosechar más ventajas políticas y económicas en una sociedad globalizada.   Chile pretende sentar las bases sobre las cuales alcanzar una integración regional más sólida. Se trata de la convergencia en la diversidad. Estamos conscientes de la diversidad de nuestra región, pero también debemos ser capaces de identificar lo que nos une y cómo podemos integrar nuestras ideas, nuestras perspectivas y nuestras economías.   Por otra parte, Chile está ayudando a los países menos desarrollados a hacer esfuerzos por alcanzar el desarrollo inclusivo, en especial en América Central y el Caribe. La cooperación Sur–Sur es una de nuestras prioridades y una responsabilidad moral. Durante los últimos años, el “Fondo Chile contra el Hambre y la Pobreza” ha financiado proyectos de cooperación en todo el mundo, desde las becas Nelson Mandela que creamos para financiar trabajos de postgrado realizados por ciudadanos africanos en universidades chilenas, hasta reformas judiciales y entrenamiento policial en el Triángulo Norte de Centroamérica, por mencionar unos pocos ejemplos.   Señoras y Señores:   Grotius nos brinda sabiduría para estos tiempos. Al escribir también en un momento cuando la estabilidad social estaba presionada, Grotius tuvo la intuición de que las personas, para convivir, tenían la única opción de reunirse como grupo (appetitus societatis). Con miras a obtener una ventaja común, ellas forman comunidades políticas, pacíficas y organizadas, es decir, los Estados Soberanos, que derivan su soberanía de la voluntad humana de cada individuo y cuya finalidad reside en la paz y la justicia.   De acuerdo con esto, sostenemos que la prevención de conflictos, consolidación de la paz, construcción de instituciones democráticas y el desarrollo requieren la participación de todas las partes interesadas.   El Derecho Internacional ha creado un potente relato universal de la dignidad humana, en el que se incluye el debido proceso, el estado de Derecho, la libertad de expresión, libertad de culto, el principio de la no discriminación y otros derechos civiles y políticos, así como también económicos, sociales y culturales.   Este relato de los derechos ha sido incorporado a nivel universal y regional en tratados y organismos de supervisión, al igual que en los tribunales regionales. Por otra parte, los organismos de supervisión de la ONU y el Tribunal Penal Internacional han consagrado la responsabilidad individual además de la responsabilidad del Estado.   En nuestra región, el Derecho Internacional ha estado presente desde los primeros años de la independencia. Las doctrinas que criticaban las prácticas corrientes de la época surgieron en el hemisferio y han sido parte de nuestra vida política e institucional desde entonces. Andrés Bello, uno de los juristas más eminentes de América Latina y uno de los padres fundadores intelectuales de mi país, dejó sus huellas en el derecho civil, derecho constitucional y en los famosos Principios de Derecho Internacional.    Importantes contribuciones al concepto de derechos humanos surgieron con la adopción pionera de la Declaración Americana de Derechos y Obligaciones del Hombre en 1948, la que precedió la Declaración Universal de Derechos Humanos. Los padres fundadores del derecho internacional en el continente, tales como Alejandro Álvarez, Carlos Calvo y José María Drago, alzaron la voz en favor de la igualdad jurídica entre los Estados y la fuerza universal del Derecho Internacional.   Guiada por estas lecciones, la región ha podido lograr importantes avances en el derecho económico internacional, derecho del mar y el derecho de los derechos humanos. Las decisiones de la Corte Interamericana de Derechos Humanos, por ejemplo, el derecho de petición, la protección de las víctimas, la revisión de la competencia de los tribunales militares para juzgar a civiles o la relación entre las normas jurídicas sobre el desacato y la libertad de expresión, o bien en torno a la discriminación sobre la base de la orientación sexual, son señales de un fuerte compromiso con los valores universales. Éstas y otras decisiones han sido esenciales para la expansión de la dignidad y las libertades humanas en un país como el mío, el cual se enorgullece de cumplir con sus obligaciones internacionales.   Nosotros, al igual que todos los países, debemos comprender que el proceso de asegurar la dignidad humana es permanente y debemos volver a comprometernos a adoptar y cumplir con nuestras obligaciones internacionales. Conforme a mi experiencia, cuando presenciamos flagrantes violaciones de los derechos humanos y nos abstenemos de actuar, lo más probable es que terminemos enfrentando la inestabilidad de sociedades fracturadas, la polarización, con todos sus efectos indirectos sobre la paz, la seguridad y el desarrollo económico. Por esta razón, debemos trabajar de consuno para aceptar la aplicación obligatoria de estas normas sobre los derechos humanos fundamentales, sin reservas. En mi opinión, esto tendría un carácter preventivo puesto que las decisiones de los órganos de supervisión no solo abordan las acciones pasadas sino que también tienen un efecto disuasivo a futuro.   En nuestra comunidad internacional, un prerrequisito básico para fomentar las soluciones efectivas es el fortalecimiento del sistema de instituciones globales y la cooperación internacional, con amplia representación, mandatos claros y herramientas efectivas.   Nos damos cuenta de que todos somos responsables de asegurar que el sistema internacional funcione como es debido. Un elemento esencial es el principio de adhesión al Derecho Internacional, lo que incluye el estricto respeto por los tratados como un medio de garantizar la paz y la estabilidad internacional. Esto exige respetar lo que se ha acordado y no hacer mal uso de los mecanismos que se han diseñado para resolver las diferencias que puedan existir en forma pacífica. El abuso de tribunales internacionales a través de demandas artificiales podría contribuir a erosionar los mecanismos existentes.   Grotius argumenta que el Derecho Natural, como norma universal nunca fracasará, ya que representa la más alta autoridad que regula las relaciones entre los Estados.   Éste es el mayor legado de Grotius: "pacta sunt servanda", que consiste en la obligación de cumplir los acuerdos. Éste es un principio central del Derecho Internacional, sobre el cual se basa la convivencia civil entre las personas, y sobre el cual aún podemos crear soluciones a las crisis en la comunidad internacional. Como aseveró Andrés Bello, “las reglas establecidas por la razón o por mutuo consentimiento son las únicas que sirven para el ajuste de las diferencias entre soberanos.”   El desarrollo del Derecho Internacional ha fortalecido el precepto jurídico del principio de Pacta sunt servanda, mediante la inclusión de otros criterios agregados al Derecho Internacional de los Tratados. Uno de dichos principios es el que afirma que ningún Estado puede invocar su legislación nacional como un medio para incumplir con esta fuente del Derecho.   Sabemos que, desde sus inicios, el Derecho Internacional ha dependido de la voluntad de sus gobernados y que el acatamiento depende de la conducta justa de aquellos que están obligados por sus normas. Es por esto que mi país ha consagrado en nuestra Constitución Política la convergencia de los principios ya mencionados, los que dan la certeza de que Chile cumplirá con sus obligaciones internacionales.   Éstos son los desafíos antiguos y nuevos que plantea el Derecho Internacional a nuestros Estados. Estas creencias y compromisos deberían orientar nuestro accionar y nuestro deber de construir un mundo mejor, un mundo en el cual hay mayor equilibrio entre el desarrollo y la conservación de nuestro medio ambiente, más justicia, cohesión, igualdad y dignidad en nuestras sociedades y entre nuestras naciones.   Muchas gracias.