(Versión Original)   Dear friends:   I would like to welcome you all to Santiago on the occasion of the Thirty-ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. It is not often that we have the privilege of receiving Antarctic policy-makers from over fifty countries, committed to working together within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty system.   This international regime has assured that the continent is free from army forces and free from nuclear weapons -as a whole continent- for more than 55 years. And has had a clear result: Antarctica today is a natural reserve dedicated to Peace and Science. We hope that this meeting may help create a greater understanding among the wider public regarding the significant contributions made by our countries in the preservation and use of this remote area of our planet.   This week, delegations from multiples countries have come together with one common objective: to work in a collaborative manner to address current and future issues that this continent faces. These challenges are multiple in nature and include the effects of climate change on the Antarctic environment, the steady increase in tourism and non-governmental activities and their impact on Antarctic ecosystems, the necessity of increasing collaborative scientific research in areas of global interest and the sharing of logistic platforms among the Parties, just to mention a few.   This year, in particular, is special given that we are celebrating 25 years since the signing of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. This is a unique international instrument that establishes a framework that has permitted the effective protection of particularly fragile ecosystems. We have come a long way since the Protocol entered into force in 1998 and yet we have still much ground to cover.   We have a collective responsibility in carefully managing this continent. This is our task, but it is also crucial that each Party contribute through strong national Antarctic policies. Chile has done its share since the signing of the Treaty in December 1959. More recently, we have been engaged in strengthening both our national Antarctic policies and its institutions.   In the last two years, we have approved an Antarctic Strategic Plan covering the period 2015 to 2019; shared with the public our Antarctic Strategic Vision for the next 20 years, which contains more than 120 recommendations addressing both national and international concerns; we have reengaged in Antarctic Inspections, from which we had been absent for 26 years; and we have many other plans for the near future.   This year, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is leading the effort to update our National Antarctic Policy, to meet the challenges that have arisen since its adoption in the year 2000. This is a task to be completed by the end of 2016 and in close collaboration with many national Antarctic stakeholders.   We are proud that Punta Arenas is a recognized Antarctic gateway. Today, 21 National Scientific Programs use Punta Arenas as a bridge to the Antarctic Peninsula, many using our logistic platform for accessing their national stations. Punta Arenas will also be home to the Antarctic International Centre. The project, which will mean an investment of close to 40 million dollars, will include state of the art laboratories, offices, logistic facilities and an interactive museum, that will help create a better understanding of that continent within our society.   But this Centre will not be solely for our national scientific community: it will also be open to foreign national programs, making a reality the vision of greater international collaboration in the field of Antarctic Science. The Centre should be operational by the beginning of 2019.    Chile is fully committed to upholding the principles and values of the Antarctic Treaty System that have served us so well during more than half a century. The protection of the Antarctic environment and its fragile ecosystems is a serious concern for Chile. We are ready to face the challenges ahead and, in doing so, will work closely with you.   I hope that in your deliberations this week, you take to heart the words of our beloved Pablo Neruda in his poem “Antarctic Stones”:  “All ends there and nothing ends: there all begins”. May the meetings this week, be the beginning of the next 50 years of Antarctic collaboration.  Thank you so much.    *****   (Traducción)   Amigas y amigos:   Me gustaría darles a todos la bienvenida a Santiago en ocasión de la XXXIX Reunión Consultiva del Tratado Antártico. No es frecuente que tengamos el privilegio de recibir a los responsables de las políticas de la Antártida de más de 50 países, que se han comprometido a trabajar juntos en el marco del Sistema del Tratado Antártico.   Este régimen internacional ha asegurado que el continente esté ajeno a fuerzas militares y armas nucleares -el continente completo- por más de 55 años. Y ha tenido un resultado claro: la Antártida es hoy una reserva natural dedicada a la paz y a la ciencia. Esperamos que esta reunión pueda ayudar a crear un mayor entendimiento entre la opinión pública acerca de las significativas contribuciones realizadas por nuestros países en la preservación y el uso de esta remota zona de nuestro planeta.    Esta semana, las delegaciones de múltiples países se han reunido con un objetivo común: trabajar de manera cooperativa para abordar los problemas actuales y futuros que enfrenta este continente. Estos desafíos son de naturaleza múltiple e incluyen los efectos del cambio climático sobre el medio ambiente antártico, el constante aumento de las actividades turísticas y no gubernamentales y su impacto sobre los ecosistemas antárticos, la necesidad de aumentar la investigación científica colaborativa en áreas de interés global y el intercambio de plataformas logísticas entre las partes, sólo por mencionar algunos.   Este año, en particular, es especial teniendo en cuenta que estamos celebrando 25 años desde la firma del Protocolo sobre Protección del Medio Ambiente del Tratado Antártico. Se trata de un instrumento internacional único que establece un marco que ha permitido la efectiva protección de ecosistemas particularmente frágiles. Hemos recorrido un largo camino desde que el Protocolo entró en vigor en 1998 y todavía nos queda mucho camino por recorrer.   Tenemos una responsabilidad colectiva en el manejo cuidadoso de este continente. Ésta es nuestra tarea, pero es crucial también que cada parte contribuya a través de fuertes políticas nacionales antárticas. Chile ha hecho lo suyo desde la firma del Tratado en diciembre de 1959. Más recientemente, hemos participado en el fortalecimiento tanto de nuestras políticas nacionales antárticas como de sus instituciones.   En los últimos dos años, hemos aprobado un Plan Estratégico Antártico que abarca el período 2015-2019; hemos compartido con la opinión pública nuestra Visión Estratégica Antártica para los próximos 20 años, que contiene más de 120 recomendaciones para abordar preocupaciones nacionales e internacionales; hemos retomado las Inspecciones Antárticas, de las cuales habíamos permanecido  ausentes durante 26 años; y tenemos muchos otros planes para el futuro próximo.   Este año, el Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores está liderando el esfuerzo para actualizar nuestra Política Nacional Antártica, y así afrontar los desafíos que se han planteado desde su aprobación en el año 2000. Ésta es una tarea que se completará a finales de 2016 y en estrecha colaboración con varias partes nacionales interesadas en la Antártida.   Estamos orgullosos de que Punta Arenas sea una reconocida puerta de entrada a la Antártida. Hoy en día, 21 Programas Científicos Nacionales utilizan Punta Arenas como puente hacia la Península Antártica, muchos de ellos usando nuestra plataforma logística para acceder a sus estaciones nacionales. Punta Arenas también será la sede del Centro Internacional Antártico. El proyecto, que supondrá una inversión cercana a los US$ 40 millones, incluirá laboratorios de última generación, oficinas, instalaciones logísticas y un museo interactivo, que ayudará a crear una mejor comprensión de ese continente en nuestra sociedad.   Pero este Centro no será únicamente para nuestra comunidad científica nacional: también estará abierto a programas nacionales extranjeros, haciendo realidad la visión de una mayor colaboración internacional en el campo de la Ciencia Antártica. El Centro debería estar en funcionamiento a principios de 2019.   Chile está plenamente comprometido con la defensa de los principios y valores del Sistema del Tratado Antártico, que nos han servido tan bien durante más de medio siglo. La protección del medio ambiente antártico y sus frágiles ecosistemas es una seria preocupación para Chile. Estamos listos para hacer frente a los desafíos del futuro y, al hacerlo, trabajaremos estrechamente con ustedes.  Espero que en sus debates de esta semana, se tomen muy en serio las palabras de nuestro querido Pablo Neruda en su poema "Piedras Antárticas": "Allí termina todo y no termina: allí comienza todo”.  Qué las reuniones de esta semana, sean el comienzo de los próximos 50 años de colaboración antártica.   Muchas gracias.