(Versión original)   Dear Friends:  It is a great pleasure to address the Sweden-Chile Business Forum and it is an honor that so many public and business representatives are here. Because this is a great opportunity to discuss ways to promote innovation, technology and Corporate Social Responsibility, among other trade issues, all which have as their final purpose the achievement of sustainable development.  In the last twenty-five years, Chile has successfully integrated into very competitive markets. We are an open economy with an extensive network of trade agreements:  25 FTAs with 64 countries, accounting for 94% of Chile’s exports and over 60% of our GDP. We are the world's largest copper producer and have become important agroindustry exporters while improving our infrastructure and our services industry. We have low rates of inflation and unemployment, improved and updated our customs procedures and standards and become a trade and investment hub in the region.   We are witnessing an economic slowdown and a steep fall in the prices of most commodities, the centerpiece of the export strategy of most Latin American economies, creating a low growth scenario. Even with a sustained effort to improve our competitiveness and productivity, we face an even greater long-term challenge: to promote innovation and entrepreneurship in public and private spheres.  We have some tasks to accomplish. We need to improve our current industries and to develop new and innovative industries. We also have to increase our productivity, integrate global and regional value chains and continue to negotiate and update our trade agreements, including the Association Agreement with the EU, in order to ensure we are creating new business opportunities, while meeting the highest labor and environmental standards.  Let me talk about the domestic policies, in terms of Entrepreneurship, Productivity and Foreign Direct Investment.  At the national level we have taken several steps. Among them is the Productivity, Innovation and Growth Agenda, that we adopted in 2014, and which addresses the main reasons there is still a gap between Chile and developed economies. Through this Agenda we intend to move forward towards an economy that is less dependent on natural resources.  In fact, just last week we signed a bill with a set of initiatives aimed to improve productivity by improving our financial system, making it more accessible, and by promoting services exportations, a new economic sector that has more than tripled in the last 10 years. This project is the first of many products from a permanent discussion we are having in Chile, where we hope that all economic actors will be present. Probably, many of the Chilean delegation members will make presentation explaining to you more details what are the Agenda and what are the key areas where we want to innovate and develop.  Another challenge is attracting more Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).  In recent years, FDI has shown a sustained increase, enhancing Chile’s competitiveness and contributing new resources as well as technological development, employment and specialized knowledge.  Chile´s longstanding political and economic stability, its transparency and competitiveness, as well as its excellent business prospects, position the country as an excellent destination for foreign investment in Latin America and one of the world’s leading destinations. Due to its infrastructure and connectivity, it also serves as a platform for conducting business throughout the region. All of these advantages that I mentioned can be used also by the companies who have seated in Chile to be part of the benefit in the region, but also in all rest of the world where we do have a very strong ties and trade agreements.  We also have a new law on Foreign Direct Investment that establishes guarantees for foreign investors and creates the Foreign Investment Promotion Agency, as a replacement –I would say, an upgrade- to the Foreign Investment Committee that we had in the past.  This new Law that we have approved in middle of the last year, provides for the possibility for foreign investors to enter into new investment contracts, under similar terms and conditions as those negotiated under Decree Law 600. Furthermore, all foreign investment contracts subscribed before January 1st 2016, under Decree Law 600, will remain in force. In addition, the new law provides for a tax invariability of 44.45% for a period of up to 4 years, beginning on January of this year  There are about 125 Swedish companies that have representation in Chile. These companies chose our country because of our institutional stability, the responsible management of our economy, and our extensive network of free trade agreements.  But it’s with not only about bilateral issues, that they’re very important indeed, but we see, as I mentioned before, Chile is as a port, I would say, because we’re in the Pacific, for the APEC region, but also as a bridge country inside Latin America. So I will speak a little about Regional Integration and Like-Minded Countries. Internationally, we are focused on promoting integration within Latin America and Asia Pacific, while enhancing relations with like – minded countries, like Sweden.  We are currently participating in the TransPacific Partnership Agreement (TPP), which sets and raises the global standard in the trade of goods and services, as well as other trade disciplines. The signing of the TPP represents the commitment of 12 Pacific Rim countries, representing a combined population of 800 million people, represents 40% of the world economy, almost 40% of all investment, and more than 25% of international trade.  But as you know well, we are also members of the Pacific Alliance, integrated by Chile, Mexico, Colombia and Peru and which has 42 observers, including Sweden. In July, we will host the Presidential Summit of the Pacific Alliance, taking over the Presidency Pro Tempore of the Pacific Alliance for a year. We have invited Minister to go, and maybe you can go with a delegation and some business people. Among other tasks, our emphasis will be on strengthening the link with observer states, the incorporation of SMEs to the Business Council and the establishment of a public-private agenda on innovation issues.   We will also continue to push for convergence with Mercosur, as well as with other blocs, like ASEAN and APEC.  With Sweden, our trade relations are regulated by the Association Agreement between the EU and Chile that entered into force in February 2003. Chile was the first Latin American country who signed an agreement with the European Union. But of course, time has passed and other countries, who get it with, if I may say, better conditions. So, we are interested in launching the negotiations to modernize this Agreement by the end of this year and we hope to get your support.    This visit has represented an opportunity to strengthen our collaboration and to invite Swedish business to invest in Chile. Yesterday, we updated –as minister has mentioned- our bilateral agreements on green technologies and innovation, sustainable urban development, and sustainable infrastructure and public procurement, all of which should allow us to create a platform for exchanging views and practices in areas of key interest for our development.  We see great potential in areas such as sustainability, where Chile and Sweden can work together, exploring possibilities for joint cooperation in fields such as sustainable energy, mining and forestry. The signing of both the Memorandum of Understanding on sustainable and innovative mining and in the area of sustainable forestry, are big steps in this direction. And the minister of Transportation and Telecommunications, some minutes today, will sign a letter of agreement in terms of working on analyzing the experience of Sweden in electric buses, because that’s is a challenge for Chile to have sustainable cities.  You mentioned it, minister, the gender issues on boards, and when we arrived to government, on State business it was dramatic, it was 3% of so. So I would like put myself ambitious goal so I will put a goal to the end of the government, it’ll a 40% of directors on state companies’ boards, and so we can also push the example for private companies. I think the last time I heard about it we were about 26%, with not in 40% yet, but we’re working very strongly on that. And it’s not just because is the right thing to do, it’s mainly because it’s the smart thing to do.  And during the crisis it was shown -and I think your neighbor, Norway has shown- that when you have more women on boards, I mean the performance has been increased, it has improved. So, it’s not because we women want it because we’re women, it’s because everybody win when we have many women on that.  Finally, I want to mention an issue that’s important to both of our countries and signals our like mindedness: the protection of human rights in business. Companies, both nationally and internationally, have a positive impact on economic growth and prosperity, but when their actions cross ethical boundaries, they can also cause adverse consequences for human rights.  Our country strongly supports the UN Guiding Principles on Human Rights and Business, which have broad international consensus. We are working on the national implementation of these principles through the development of a National Action Plan. This agenda urges companies to identify and address the potential impacts on those rights, and thus prevent conflicts between companies and their environment.  Dear Friends:  I have addressed briefly some of the issues that represent challenges for our country and our response to them. As like – minded countries we can work together towards sustainable development by promoting innovation, entrepreneurship and a better environment for investments.   And as the minister said, we have done well, but we can do it much better.  Thank you so much.   *****    (Traducción)   Queridos amigos:  Es un gran placer dirigirme al Foro Empresarial Chileno-Sueco y es un honor que tantos representantes públicos y empresariales estén aquí. Porque ésta es una gran oportunidad para discutir formas de promover la innovación, la tecnología y la responsabilidad social corporativa, entre otras cuestiones comerciales, todas las cuales tienen como objetivo final lograr el desarrollo sostenible.  En los últimos 25 años, Chile se ha integrado con éxito a mercados muy competitivos. Somos una economía abierta con una extensa red de acuerdos comerciales: 25 acuerdos de libre comercio con 64 países, que representan el 94% de las exportaciones de Chile y más del 60% de nuestro PIB. Somos el mayor productor de cobre del mundo y nos hemos convertido en importantes exportadores agroindustriales, mientras mejoramos nuestra infraestructura y nuestra industria de servicios. Tenemos bajas tasas de inflación y desempleo, hemos mejorado y actualizado nuestros procedimientos y normas aduaneras y nos hemos convertido en un centro comercial y de inversión en la región.  Estamos en presencia de una desaceleración económica y una fuerte caída de los precios de la mayoría de los commodities, la pieza central de la estrategia de exportación de la mayoría de las economías de América Latina, lo que ha generado un escenario de bajo crecimiento. Incluso con un esfuerzo sostenido para mejorar nuestra competitividad y productividad, nos enfrentamos a un desafío aún mayor a largo plazo: promover la innovación y el espíritu empresarial en los ámbitos públicos y privados.  Tenemos algunas tareas a realizar. Tenemos que mejorar nuestras industrias actuales y desarrollar industrias nuevas e innovadoras. También tenemos que aumentar nuestra productividad, integrar cadenas de valor global y regional y seguir negociando y actualizando nuestros acuerdos comerciales, incluido el Acuerdo de Asociación con la UE, con el fin de garantizar que estamos creando nuevas oportunidades de negocio, mientras cumplimos con los más altos estándares laborales y medioambientales.  Permítanme hablar sobre políticas nacionales, en términos de emprendimiento, productividad e inversión extranjera directa.  A nivel nacional, hemos tomado varias medidas. Entre ellas está la Agenda de Productividad, Innovación y Crecimiento, que adoptamos en 2014, y que aborda las principales razones por las que todavía hay una brecha entre Chile y los países desarrollados. A través de esta Agenda, pretendemos avanzar hacia una economía que sea menos dependiente de los recursos naturales.  De hecho, la semana pasada, firmamos un proyecto de ley con un conjunto de iniciativas destinadas a aumentar la productividad mediante la mejora de nuestro sistema financiero, haciendo que sea más accesible, y mediante la promoción de las exportaciones de servicios, un nuevo sector económico que se ha más que triplicado en los últimos 10 años. Este proyecto es el primero de muchos productos de una permanente discusión que estamos teniendo en Chile, donde esperamos que todos los agentes económicos estén presentes. Probablemente, algunos de los miembros de la delegación chilena realizarán una presentación explicándoles más detalles de lo que es la Agenda y cuáles son las áreas clave en las que queremos innovar y desarrollar.  Otro desafío es atraer más Inversión Extranjera Directa (IED). En los últimos años, la IED ha mostrado un aumento sostenido, mejorando la competitividad de Chile y aportando nuevos recursos, así como el desarrollo tecnológico, el empleo y el conocimiento especializado.  La estabilidad política y económica de muchos años que tiene Chile, su transparencia y competitividad, así como sus excelentes perspectivas de negocio, posicionan al país como un excelente destino para la inversión extranjera en América Latina y uno de los principales destinos del mundo. Debido a su infraestructura y conectividad, también sirve como plataforma para la realización de negocios en toda la región. Todas estas ventajas que mencioné las pueden aprovechar las empresas que se han establecido en Chile para obtener beneficios en la región, pero también en el resto del mundo, donde tenemos muy fuertes vínculos y acuerdos comerciales.  También tenemos una nueva Ley de Inversión Extranjera Directa que establece garantías para los inversionistas extranjeros y crea la Agencia de Promoción de la Inversión Extranjera, como reemplazo –yo diría, una mejora- para el Comité de Inversiones Extranjeras que teníamos en el pasado.  Esta nueva Ley, que hemos aprobado a mediados del año pasado, prevé la posibilidad de que los inversionistas celebren nuevos contratos de inversión, en términos y condiciones similares a las negociadas en virtud del Decreto Ley 600. Por otra parte, todos los contratos de inversión extranjera suscritos antes del 1 de enero de 2016, contenidos en el Decreto Ley 600, permanecerán en vigor. Además, la nueva Ley prevé una invariabilidad tributaria del 44.45% por un período de hasta 4 años, comenzando en enero de este año.  Hay alrededor de 125 empresas suecas que tienen representación en Chile. Estas empresas eligieron nuestro país debido a nuestra estabilidad institucional, la gestión responsable de nuestra economía y nuestra extensa red de acuerdos de libre comercio.  Pero no es sólo sobre cuestiones bilaterales, que de hecho son muy importantes, sino que vemos -como he mencionado antes- que Chile es como un puerto, yo diría, porque estamos en la región del Pacífico, para la región de APEC, sino también como un país puente dentro de América Latina. Así que voy a hablar un poco sobre integración regional y países que tiene perspectivas similares.  A nivel internacional, estamos enfocados en la promoción de la integración entre América Latina y Asia Pacífico, y al mismo tiempo mejorar las relaciones con países que tienen ideas similares, como Suecia.  Estamos participando actualmente en el Acuerdo de Asociación Transpacífico (TPP), que establece y eleva el estándar mundial en el comercio de bienes y servicios, así como otras disciplinas comerciales. La firma del TPP representa el compromiso de 12 países del Pacífico, es decir, una población combinada de 800 millones de personas, lo que representa el 40% de la economía mundial, casi el 40% de toda la inversión, y más del 25% del comercio internacional.  También somos miembros de la Alianza del Pacífico, integrada por Chile, México, Colombia y Perú, y que cuenta con 42 observadores, entre ellos Suecia. En julio, vamos a realizar la Cumbre Presidencial de la Alianza del Pacífico, haciéndonos cargo de la Presidencia Pro Témpore de la Alianza del Pacífico durante un año. Hemos invitado al ministro para que vaya y tal vez lo haga con alguna delegación y gente de negocios. Entre otras tareas, nuestro énfasis estará en el fortalecimiento de la relación con los Estados observadores, la incorporación de las PYME en el Consejo Empresarial y el establecimiento de una agenda pública-privada en temas de innovación.  También vamos a seguir impulsando para lograr la convergencia con el Mercosur, así como con otros bloques, como la ASEAN y APEC.  Con Suecia, nuestras relaciones comerciales están reguladas por el Acuerdo de Asociación entre la UE y Chile, que entró en vigor en febrero de 2003. Chile fue el primer país latinoamericano que firmó un acuerdo con la UE, pero, claro, el tiempo pasó y otros países lo lograron pero, yo diría, con mejores condiciones. Así que, estamos interesados en el lanzamiento de negociaciones para modernizar el presente Acuerdo a finales de este año, y esperamos conseguir su apoyo.  Esta visita ha representado una oportunidad para fortalecer nuestra colaboración e invitar a las empresas suecas a invertir en Chile. Ayer, actualizamos –como ha mencionado el ministro- nuestros acuerdos bilaterales en tecnologías verdes e innovación, desarrollo sostenible urbano e infraestructura sostenible y contratación pública, todo lo cual debería permitirnos crear una plataforma para el intercambio de opiniones y prácticas en áreas de interés clave para nuestro desarrollo.  Vemos un gran potencial en áreas como la sostenibilidad, donde Chile y Suecia pueden trabajar juntos, explorando las posibilidades de cooperación conjunta en campos como la energía sostenible, la minería y la silvicultura. La firma tanto del Memorando de Entendimiento sobre la minería sostenible e innovadora y el del área de silvicultura sostenible, son grandes pasos en esta dirección. Y el ministro de Transportes y Telecomunicaciones, en un rato más, firmará una carta de acuerdo en términos de trabajar en el análisis de la experiencia de Suecia en autobuses eléctricos, porque es un desafío para Chile tener ciudades sustentables.  Usted lo ha mencionado, ministro, las cuestiones de género en los directorios y cuando llegamos al Gobierno, la cuestión era dramática en las empresas públicas, era de un 3% más o menos. Así que me gustaría ponerme una meta ambiciosa, voy a poner como meta que para el final del Gobierno, sea de un 40% de los directorios de las empresas estatales, lo que también puede impulsar con el ejemplo en las empresas privadas. Creo que la última vez que oí de ello, estábamos alrededor del 26%, todavía no en el 40%, pero estamos trabajando muy fuertemente en eso. Y no es sólo porque es lo que hay que hacer, principalmente porque es lo más inteligente por hacer.  Y durante la crisis se ha demostrado -y creo que su vecino, Noruega lo ha demostrado- que cuando se tienen más mujeres en los directorios, me refiero a que el desempeño ha aumentado, se ha mejorado. Por lo tanto, no es porque las mujeres queremos que sea así porque seamos mujeres, sino porque todo el mundo gana cuando tenemos muchas mujeres en ello. Por último, quiero mencionar un tema que es importante para nuestros dos países y entrega señales sobre nuestra mentalidad: la protección de los derechos humanos en los negocios. Las empresas, tanto a nivel nacional como internacional, tienen un impacto positivo en el crecimiento económico y la prosperidad, pero cuando sus acciones traspasan los límites éticos, también pueden causar consecuencias adversas para los derechos humanos.  Nuestro país apoya firmemente los Principios Rectores de los Derechos Humanos y de Negocios de las Naciones Unidas, que tienen un amplio consenso internacional. Estamos trabajando en la implementación nacional de estos principios a través del desarrollo de un Plan Nacional de Acción. Esta Agenda insta a las empresas a identificar y abordar los impactos potenciales sobre esos derechos, y por lo tanto prevenir conflictos entre las empresas y su entorno.  Queridos amigos:  He abordado brevemente algunos de los temas que representan desafíos para nuestro país y nuestra respuesta a ellos. Como países con perspectivas similares, podemos trabajar juntos hacia el desarrollo sostenible mediante la promoción de la innovación, el espíritu empresarial y un mejor entorno para las inversiones.  Y como el ministro dijo, lo hemos hecho bien, pero podemos hacerlo mejor.  Muchas gracias.