(Original Statement)    Thank you so much, Governor Inslee.   I am very pleased to visit your beautiful state, but also I want to thank you for your warm welcome. And of course, the governor has mentioned we have shared the common agenda with Washington State, that has been growing exponentially, I would say, since we signed in 2015 the Memorandum of Understanding on Climate Change and Clean Energy, and we hope that this visit will permit to strengthen our ties and create even more opportunities to join collaboration.         We have continued the dialogue on the areas that we are shared, as it has mentioned, shared experiences on national disasters response, and also on clean energies what work in able to, I would say, continued advancing on our combat against climate change.      We have also spoken about a regional project on forestry, energy particularly solar; we’ve also built upon initiatives such as Seminar on Clean Energy that was held into 2016, at which we learnt about Washington State experience using wood as fuel.   And also we have spoken about the ocean, because we have been invited by the Government of Washington State, in 2016 Chile became a member for Alliance to combat the Acidification of the Ocean, which includes California, Oregon and the British Columbia.   Of course, we spoke about with our vulnerability to earthquakes, tsunamis and forest fires. And with the Governor we spoke about future collaboration on these issues.   We also spoke with some of advisors of what kind of equipment aircraft works for them on the firefighting areas, so we have learnt about Washington experience on this, on the prevention of forest fires but also on reforestation and recovery, and it can be very timely for Chile given the huge fire that swept our country at the beginning of the year.        So also we mentioned to the Governor that before coming here that we visited Amazon and in that regards with looking for to continue working on the areas that we have developed with Amazon, in terms of continuing the agreement signed last march, which allows us to take advantage to the wide range possibilities that cloud-based services offer, and this collaboration with Amazon includes support for the modernization of efforts of Government as well as for companies that wish to work in the cloud promoting innovation and moving towards the knowledge economy.     You, Governor, have mentioned other areas of interest like agriculture area and so on, and we wish that this visit will permit us to strengthen our relations and also be the possibilities for other companies that here in Seattle that can look at how we can have interesting investment in Chile too.   So thank you so much, Governor, for this possibility and we hope to continue working together.   And of course, I have invited the Governor to visit us in Chile.   Thank you.     (Traducción)      Muchas gracias, Gobernador Inslee.   Estoy muy contenta de visitar su hermoso Estado, pero también quiero darle las gracias por su cálida bienvenida. Y por supuesto, el Gobernador ha mencionado que hemos compartido la agenda común con el Estado de Washington, que ha crecido exponencialmente, diría yo, desde que firmamos en 2015 el Memorando de Entendimiento sobre Cambio Climático y Energía Limpia, y esperamos que esta visita permita fortalecer nuestros lazos y crear incluso más oportunidades para unirnos a la colaboración.   Hemos continuado el diálogo sobre las áreas que compartimos, como se ha mencionado, las experiencias compartidas sobre la respuesta a los desastres nacionales y también sobre las energías limpias, que funcionan para poder, diría yo, seguir avanzando en nuestro combate contra el cambio climático.   También hemos hablado de un proyecto regional sobre la silvicultura, la energía particularmente solar; también hemos construido sobre iniciativas como el Seminario sobre Energía Limpia que se celebró en 2016, en el que aprendimos acerca de la experiencia del Estado de Washington utilizando la madera como combustible.   Y también hemos hablado del océano, porque hemos sido invitados por el Gobierno del Estado de Washington, en 2016 Chile se convirtió en miembro de la Alianza para combatir la Acidificación del Océano, que incluye a California, Oregón y la Columbia Británica.   Por supuesto, hablamos de nuestra vulnerabilidad a terremotos, tsunamis e incendios forestales. Y con el Gobernador hablamos sobre la futura colaboración en estos temas.   También hablamos con algunos de los asesores sobre qué tipo de aviones funcionan para estos desastres en las áreas de extinción de incendios, así que hemos aprendido la experiencia de Washington en esto, en la prevención de incendios forestales, pero también en la reforestación y recuperación, que puede ser muy oportuno, dado el gran incendio que barrió con nuestro país a principios de año.   También le mencionamos al Gobernador que antes de venir aquí visitamos Amazon y en lo que respecta, buscar continuar trabajando en las áreas que hemos desarrollado con Amazon, en términos de continuar el acuerdo firmado en marzo pasado, lo que nos permite aprovechar las amplias posibilidades que ofrecen los servicios basados en la nube, y esta colaboración con Amazon incluye el apoyo en la modernización de los esfuerzos del Gobierno, así como a las empresas que desean trabajar en la nube, promoviendo la innovación y avanzando hacia la economía del conocimiento.   Usted, Gobernador, ha mencionado otras áreas de interés como la agricultura, etc.; y deseamos que esta visita nos permita fortalecer nuestras relaciones y también que haya posibilidades de que otras empresas de aquí en Seattle, puedan ver cómo podemos tener una interesante inversión en Chile también.   Muchas gracias, Gobernador, por esta posibilidad, y esperamos continuar trabajando juntos. Por supuesto, he invitado al Gobernador para que nos visite en Chile.   Muchas gracias.