(Original)   Al Gore: What you have done is good for Chile, obviously, and really amazing, but what you have done is also providing a lot of inspirations for all of us, really believing that we can solve this climate crisis and helping to lead the way up. Thank you for that.    President Bachelet: Well, thank you so much for that recognition and I have to tell you that we have shown your documentary in many places, and the following days we will go to many, if I would say, places where a lot of normal simple people is to, you know, improving the awareness of the importance of fighting climate change and not only at the governmental level but local level too.      Al Gore: How have the people of your country reacted and interpreted this impact on the scientists tell us that they are connected to the climate crisis?     President Bachelet: Well, I think it has increased the awareness that climate change is a reality, that we need to fight against it, and we need to work altogether because we have really suffered a lot from the most damages forest fires historically and the most damaging flooding. And some of issues that I am not sure, I can’t be assured that the completed links to the climate change but it might be into a global warning in terms of so many and so strong earthquakes, tsunamis, volcano eruptions and so on, and of course in terrible droughts for more than 5 years. So people having living this; we have had to work with them to be making able to start again their lives, the cities. And so people are more aware.   Let me tell you just one example: there was a survey updated where people are asked what importance they will give to climate change or to the economy, for example. And to my surprise, the majority said that combating climate change was much more important. It is not that they don’t understand the importance of the economy, but they said that climate change combat was so important, it is much important, even than economy. I say that we need both, to improve the economy but in a sustainable way.         Al Gore: I remember coming your invitation, some years ago in Santiago, when I gave a lecture was the first time you were President of Chile and you were organizing a massive gathering and one of the biggest crowed that ever I spoke to and gave my lecture about the climate crisis, and then after serving as President, in accord with your Constitution, you then rested for a while and then you came back as President a second time.   President Bachelet: Well, when I came back in the campaign, I understood that Chile had the most, by one hand, expensive and, if I may say, “dirty” energy matrix. So we decided that if we were elected, if I was elected President, we will do an agenda that will permit to improve much more renewables and we also make the energy costs for the people, for the industries lower.   And how did we do it? We built an agenda in a participative way where we invited ecological groups, the industries, the experts, the academics and we developed an agenda for 2030 where we could make a lot of different areas, where we could improve the capacity in Chile of renewables. And of course, and to limit and restricts also the fossil energy.        And it has been extraordinary. You showed the figures some minutes ago, and how in solar power has increased dramatically, also in wind power, but also with just this year we inaugurated the first in South America Geothermic energy power. And I think it has been, by one hand, we had…yeah, so we have improved our capacities, and the other hand we have created a new sort of sector of  the industry, that has been very successful and it served for we created jobs, so, of course, making our economy more sustainable and more friendly to environment.   So I think everybody wins and this is a very good solution, but it is good also very important to build this agenda, with –and I would say– the participation of many different actors, so we could know which way we should go, so we have achieved good results.      Al Gore: Yes, when I heard you said that was important to build an agenda, I heard you said it was important to build a consensus in all sectors and support the agenda that takes great political skills, because you put in place a carbon tax, correct?     President Bachelet: Yes, we did that because in 2014 we made a tax reform that had different objectives: it had the objective to have taxes system that was more, if I may say, just and more equitable, and the other hand the tax reform’s intents that some issues that were very important for Chile like the education, to have enough resources in a sustainable way, not just for one or two years, and then we included green taxes and the carbon tax. So that happened then the tax reform was approved but afterwards I would say many electricity industries had decided on new projects not to go to carbon energy but to change to renewables. I think it has been very important thing.      Al Gore: Is there any secret that you can give us about how you were able to diminish the opposition to the carbon tax?   President Bachelet: Well, I don’t know if I can give you any recommendation really, because Chile’s reality is different than the US’s. But I think the idea of working together, with the industry, and creating incentives, so they can understand that green economy or blue economy is not necessarily that they are losing on, there’re can be also new, I would say, possibilities in the economy, but also to try to build consensus because on the other hand what many of the industries have been a lot of problems with the citizens when they wanted to develop a carbon plant. So I think it has been, on one hand, the need to resolve the problem that they have because the citizens will get them to the justice system to try to stop the building of these plants, and the other hand to understand that they could move to other area and that could be also rentable for them.    Al Gore: You have established a new Presidential Climate Change Advisory Commission, could you tell us briefly about these policies?   President Bachelet: Yes, on the Presidential Commission. The idea was how we combat climate change and how we ensure the future of the planet. It cannot depend on one particularly government’s determination. It should have to be a state vision, so that we have created a permanent commission, it is not a commission of this government; it is a state commission, if I may say. And we included there people with different perspectives, representing different political forces, people from academia, from the industry, from NGO, environmental NGO and so on.  And we asked them very specific tasks to give recommendations on how to continue fighting climate change so we can contribute to Chile’s future but also to the planet.   On the other hand, on forestry, we have had some, you know, NDCs according to the Paris Agreement, we defined that we will forest one hundred thousand trees and we will work also on degradation of forests, but we also are giving some incentives because Chile has a particular situation on forestry, because we plant, if I may say, more trees than we cut every year. So, in our case, forestry is a place where we are really being same efforts to emissions.      Al Gore: Well, I have so many questions and I wanted to come to Chile and learn from you, but I wanna close by thanking you again for doing this honor of being a part of this program. And I wanna say that as foresight on concerns, you really are a hero for the planet, you have provided the kind of inspiration that we really need and the kind of very careful workmind-like leadership to bring people together and support good policies. So, “muchísimas gracias”, thank you so much and again thank you for being a part of “24 Hours of Reality”   President Bachelet: Thank you so much Mr. Gore and just let me say one final word. Chile is not a rich country and we have been able to do a lot of things, so it shows that not only we must do it, we can do it, and we should do it and we will do it. And you don’t need to be a rich country to make all the things like conservation and protecting our planet. Thank you so much.     (Traducción)      Al Gore: Lo que usted ha hecho es bueno para Chile, obviamente, realmente es impresionante, pero lo que ha hecho también nos ha inspirado mucho para creer realmente que podemos solucionar esta crisis climática y para ayudar a liderar el camino. Muchas gracias por ello.     Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, muchas gracias por ese reconocimiento y tengo que decirle que nosotros hemos mostrado su documental en muchos lugares, y en los próximos días iremos a varios lugares donde la gente común y corriente está, usted ya sabe, tomando más conciencia de la importancia de luchar contra el cambio climático, pero no sólo a nivel de Gobierno, sino también a nivel local.   Al Gore: ¿Cómo la gente de su país ha reaccionado e interpretado este impacto que los científicos nos dicen está conectado con la crisis climática?    Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, creo que ha aumentado la conciencia de que el cambio climático es una realidad, que necesitamos luchar contra él, y que necesitamos trabajar juntos porque hemos sufrido los más espantosos incendios forestales de nuestra historia y las peores inundaciones. Y una de las cuestiones de las que no estoy segura,  que no puedo asegurar que esté completamente relacionado con el cambio climático, pero sí que se podría convertir en una alarma mundial tiene que ver con muchos y fuertes terremotos, maremotos, erupciones volcánicas, etc. Y, por supuesto, terribles sequías de más de cinco años. De manera que con la gente que ha estado viviendo esto, hemos tenido que trabajar juntos para que puedan recomenzar sus vidas, las ciudades. Así que la gente está más consciente.     Permítame decirle sólo un ejemplo: Hubo una encuesta reciente en donde a la gente le preguntaron sobre qué importancia le darían al cambio climático y a la economía, por ejemplo. Y para mi sorpresa, la mayoría señaló que el combate al cambio climático era más importante. No es que ellos no comprendan la importancia de la economía, pero señalaron que el combate al cambio climático era muy importante, mucho más importante incluso que la economía. Yo digo que necesitamos los dos, mejorar la economía pero de una forma sustentable.   Al Gore: Recuerdo cuando llegó su invitación, unos años atrás en Santiago, cuando di una conferencia la primera vez que usted era Presidenta de Chile y usted estuvo organizando una masiva reunión y fue una de las más grandes audiencias a la que he hablado, y di mi conferencia acerca del cambio climático, y después de servir como Presidenta, de acuerdo a la Constitución de su país, usted tuvo un receso y luego regresó como Presidenta para un segundo mandato.   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, cuando regresé en la campaña, entendí que Chile tenía, por un lado, una de las más costosas y, si puedo decirlo así, “sucias” matrices energéticas. Así que decidimos que si resultábamos electos, si yo resultaba electa como Presidenta, elaboraríamos una agenda que permitiera mejorar mucho más las energías renovables y que también redujéramos los costos de la energía para la gente y la industria.   ¿Y cómo lo hicimos? Confeccionamos una agenda de forma participativa donde invitamos a grupos ecológicos, a empresas, a expertos, a académicos, y desarrollamos una Agenda para el 2030, en donde pudiéramos hacer mucho en diferentes áreas, donde pudiéramos mejorar las energías renovables en Chile. Y, por su puesto, limitar y restringir también los combustibles fósiles.   Y ha sido extraordinario. Usted mostró las cifras hace unos minutos, sobre cómo la energía solar ha aumentado radicalmente, también la energía eólica, pero también que recién este año inauguramos la primera planta de energía geotérmica de Sudamérica. Así que hemos mejorado nuestras capacidades, y por otra parte hemos creado un nuevo tipo de sector para la industria, que ha sido muy exitoso y que sirvió para que creáramos puestos de trabajo, y por supuesto ha hecho que nuestra economía sea más sustentable y más amigable con el medio ambiente.    Así que creo que todos ganamos y es una muy buena solución, pero también es bueno e importante elaborar esta agenda, con –yo diría– la participación de los diferentes actores, así que pudimos saber qué camino debíamos tomar y logramos buenos resultados.   Al Gore: Sí, cuando escuché que usted dijo que era importante elaborar una agenda, le escuché decir que era importante construir consenso en todos sectores y apoyar la agenda, que conlleva tener grandes habilidades políticas, usted puso en marcha un impuesto al carbono, ¿es correcto?   Presidenta Bachelet: Sí lo hicimos porque en 2014, hicimos una reforma tributaria que tenía diferentes objetivos: tenía por objetivo tener un sistema tributario que fuese, si puedo llamarlo así, más justo y equitativo, y por otra parte la intención de la reforma tributaria sobre algunas cuestiones que eran muy importantes para Chile, como la educación, contar con recursos suficientes, en una forma sustentable, no sólo por uno o dos años, e incluimos el impuesto verde y el impuesto sobre el carbono. Entonces, sucedió que luego se aprobó la reforma tributaria pero después, yo diría, varias empresas eléctricas habían decidido que sus nuevos proyectos no irían con energías de carbono pero cambiaron a energías renovables. Creo que ha sido algo muy importante.       Al Gore: ¿Hay algún secreto que nos pueda compartir acerca de cómo fue capaz de disminuir la oposición al impuesto al carbono?   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, no sé si pueda darle alguna recomendación realmente, porque la realidad de Chile es diferente a la de Estados Unidos. Pero la idea de trabajar juntos, con la industria y crear incentivos, de manera que puedan entender que la economía verde o la economía azul no necesariamente les llevarán a pérdida, de que también pueden haber, yo diría, posibilidades en la economía, pero tratar de lograr consenso, porque por otra parte lo que muchas empresas han tenido son una serie de problemas con la ciudadanía cuando han querido desarrollar una planta de carbono. Así que yo creo que ha sido, por una parte, la necesidad de resolver el problema que tienen porque la ciudadanía los lleven a la Justicia intentando detener la construcción de estas plantas, y por otra parte, comprender que pueden moverse a otra área y que ello podría también resultarles rentable.        Al Gore: Usted ha establecido una Comisión Asesora Presidencial de Cambio climático, ¿podría decirnos brevemente de qué tratan estas políticas?   Presidenta Bachelet: Sí, la Comisión Presidencial. La idea era cómo combatimos el cambio climático y cómo aseguramos el futuro del planeta. Que no dependa particularmente de la determinación de un gobierno. Que tuviera una visión de Estado, de manera que creamos una comisión permanente, no es una comisión de este Gobierno, es una comisión estatal si la puedo llamar así. E incluimos ahí gente de diferentes perspectivas, representando a diferentes fuerzas políticas, gente de la academia, de la industria, de ONG, de ONG medioambientales, etc. Y les pedimos tareas muy específicas para proporcionar recomendaciones sobre cómo continuar luchando contra el cambio climático de manera de contribuir al futuro de Chile pero también del planeta.   Por otra parte, en relación a la silvicultura, hemos tenido algunos, usted ya sabe, NDC (Contribuciones previstas y determinadas a nivel nacional) según el Acuerdo de París, hemos definido que vamos a forestar 100 mil árboles y que vamos a trabajar también en relación a la degradación forestal, pero también estamos dando algunos incentivos porque Chile tiene una situación muy particular en silvicultura, porque plantamos, yo diría, más árboles de los que cortamos cada año. Así que en nuestro caso, la silvicultura es un área donde de verdad estamos haciendo los mismos esfuerzos que con las emisiones.   Al Gore: Bueno, tengo tantas preguntas, y quisiera volver a Chile y aprender de usted, pero quiero cerrar agradeciéndole nuevamente por darnos este honor de ser parte de este programa. Y quiero decir que previendo estas preocupaciones, usted de verdad es una heroína para el planeta, usted ha proporcionado el tipo de inspiración que realmente necesitamos y el tipo de liderazgo de trabajo que se preocupa de reunir a la gente y apoyar las buenas políticas. Así que, “muchísimas gracias”, muchas gracias de nuevo gracias por ser parte de “24 Hours of Reality”.    Presidenta Bachelet: Muchas gracias, señor Gore, y sólo permítame una última palabra. Chile no es un país rico y hemos sido capaces de hacer varias cosas, así que esto demuestra que no sólo debemos hacerlo, sino que podemos hacerlo, que deberíamos hacerlo y que lo haremos, y que usted no necesita ser un país rico para hacer todo para conservar y proteger a nuestro planeta. Muchas gracias.