(Original Speech)      Thank you so much, we are pleased to have this opportunity to visit and learn more about the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency of CARICOM and 18 countries that it represents.   And of course, as I mentioned before, all my solidarity to all those who suffered losses due to last week’s passage of tropical storm Harvey.   I know that tropical storm brings to the forefront the issues that this agency is dedicated to: the management and prevention of natural disasters, building resilience and trying to avoid losses of human lives.   We are working as a very good you have listened, not only with the people that have been in the meeting, but also people in charge from offices of prevention and management preparedness of Barbados, of Jamaica, of Trinidad & Tobago, to see that this program is working, and the cooperation of program is working. And we continue working.   And we have ratified our commitment to the CARICOM and to CDEMA, to continue working on areas that Chile has some experiences and also on areas on we can share experiences like how we manage and deal with the consequences of the climate change, how we also can share experience on earthquake and tsunamis, and responds to that.     As a matter of fact, we have some ongoing projects in this area. The first one aims at strengthening capacities for local response in urban search and rescue operations, that is with our USAR unities of Bomberos de Chile, Firefighters of Chile, and the first training will take place this next September in Port of Spain, in Trinidad & Tobago. And there will be attending people from Barbados, Jamaica, Antigua & Barbuda, and Trinidad & Tobago.   And also we continue working with the platform that we are developing with the Chilean-Japanese cooperation, on the Initiative called Kizuna –that means resilience in Japanese– so we are working on different aspects of disaster prevention, such as seismic criteria in construction, post disaster assessment of structural safety, mitigation of impacts of earthquakes and tsunamis, and urban rescue.   So we really acknowledge and appreciate the role of CDEMA and our cooperation Partnership CARICOM, and specially our efforts in the area of climate change and sustainable development. And we are committed to continue to work together.   Thanks you so much.     (Traducción)      Muchas gracias, estamos encantados de tener esta oportunidad de visitar y aprender más acerca de la Agencia Caribeña de Gestión de Emergencias de Desastres, de CARICOM, y los 18 países que representa.   Y, por supuesto, como mencioné antes, toda mi solidaridad a todos aquellos que sufrieron pérdidas por el paso de la tormenta tropical Harvey, la pasada semana.   Sé que la tormenta tropical pone de relieve las cuestiones a las que se dedica esta Agencia: la gestión y prevención de desastres naturales, construyendo resiliencia y tratando evitar pérdida de vidas humanas.    Estamos trabajando, como ustedes muy bien han escuchado, no sólo con la gente que la que hemos estado reunidos, sino también con personal a cargo de las oficinas de prevención y preparación de gestión de Barbados, de Jamaica, de Trinidad y Tobago, para ver que este programa esté funcionando, y la cooperación del programa está funcionando. Y continuamos trabajando.   Y hemos ratificado nuestro compromiso con CARICOM y CDEMA, para continuar trabajando en áreas en las que Chile tiene experiencias, y también en áreas en las que podemos compartir experiencias sobre cómo manejamos y lidiamos con las consecuencias del cambio climático, cómo también podemos compartir experiencias sobre terremotos y tsunamis, y responder a eso.   De hecho, tenemos algunos proyectos en curso. El primero tiene por objeto fortalecer las capacidades de respuesta local en las operaciones de búsqueda y salvamento urbanas, con nuestras unidades USAR de Bomberos de Chile, y  la primera formación tendrá lugar este próximo mes de septiembre en Puerto España, Trinidad y Tobago. Asistirán participantes de Barbados, Jamaica, Antigua y Barbuda y Trinidad y Tobago.   Y también continuamos trabajando con la plataforma que estamos desarrollando con la cooperación chileno-japonesa, en la Iniciativa Kizuna –que significa resiliencia, en japonés–, así que estamos trabajando en diferentes aspectos de la prevención de desastres, como criterios sísmicos en construcción, mitigación de impactos de terremotos y tsunamis, y rescate urbano.   Así que de verdad reconocemos y apreciamos el rol de CDEMA y nuestro socio de cooperación CARICOM, y especialmente nuestros esfuerzos en el área de cambio climático y desarrollo sostenible. Y estamos comprometidos a seguir trabajando juntos.   Muchas gracias.