(Original Speech)   Prime Minister:   I am very pleased to be here in Castries and by my meeting with you and your Cabinet, which as you have mentioned, with whom we have had a fruitful dialogue that, I am sure, will deepen our bonds of friendship.   I would like to highlight that this is a historic event, since it is the first time that a Chilean President comes for an Official Visit to Saint Lucia, and that reflects, by one hand, the importance that we give Saint Lucia and the excellent relationship and mutual respect between our nations, a friendship built since our countries established diplomatic relations in 1990.   And I know that we have discussed about that Chile and Saint Lucia share many points of view on issues of interest for our countries, both bilaterally and at the regional and global levels. And in this sense, I would like to emphasize the commitment of our both countries with fundamental values ??such as respect for democracy, human rights and the rule of law, and of course our concern for the environment.   We are proud of being one the southernmost country in Latin America and you are here en the Caribbean Sea that we share lots of challenges, and we do share our concern about the oceans or the seas, we do have a lot of consequences of climate change, and we do want to exchange all those experiences with our friends, with our partners.   And in that sense, we have been working bilateral exchanges but also in the context of CARICOM and in the context of Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS). And we will continue working on focusing on areas such as poverty eradication, agriculture and food sector, disaster prevention and management, adaptation to climate change and strengthening good practices in the public sector.   As a matter of fact, we are very happy to receive your ministers there attending some regional meetings links to some of these issues, one of them will be in terms of energy partnership for the Americas and the other one is on an International Convention on Protected Marine Areas. And also there will be a chance to exchange our experiences with your experiences in terms of fishing and other issues.   Of course, for me, as you know, Prime Minister, Gender is always a very important issue and we will continue working on at any price on that, and of course our the nations will come here as soon as possible so women, who want to start a business entrepreneurship, could have the possibilities and capacities, to do so.   And also we are thinking on our trade, and we will continue discussing many of issues, and one of the good things is that we have complemented our economies: we do not have, I mean, the kind of things that you produce here, some many of them we do not produce in Chile, so we are not adversaries, so we can work together. And I can imagine that the Chileans would love to have the possibilities to consume fantastic shrimps and lobsters, and of course bananas and so many other things. We do not produce any of them so, we can improve and enhance our possibilities on trade.   So, thank you so much and I hope that route map that we have, puts on us will fulfilled and be able to as soon as possible to sign an agreement that will brother our ties.     Thank you very much.   (Traducción)       Primer Ministro:   Estoy muy contenta de estar aquí en Castries y por mi reunión con usted y su Gabinete, con quienes –como usted ha mencionado– hemos tenido un diálogo fructífero que, estoy segura, profundizará nuestros lazos de amistad.   Quisiera destacar que se trata de un acontecimiento histórico, ya que es la primera vez que un Presidente de Chile realiza una Visita Oficial a Santa Lucía; lo que refleja, por un lado, la importancia que le damos a Santa Lucía, y la excelente relación y el respeto mutuo entre nuestras naciones, una amistad construida desde que nuestros países establecieron relaciones diplomáticas en 1990.   Y sé que hemos discutido acerca de que Chile y Santa Lucía comparten muchos puntos de vista sobre temas de interés para nuestros países, tanto a nivel bilateral como regional y mundial. Y en este sentido, quisiera destacar el compromiso de nuestros países con valores fundamentales como el respeto a la democracia, los derechos humanos y el estado de derecho, y por supuesto nuestra preocupación por el medio ambiente.   Estamos orgullosos de que siendo uno de los países más australes de Latinoamérica y estando ustedes aquí en el Mar Caribe, compartamos muchos desafíos, compartamos nuestra preocupación por los océanos o los mares, y que al tener una serie de consecuencias por el cambio climático que queramos intercambiar todas esas experiencias con nuestros amigos y socios.   Y en ese sentido, hemos estado trabajando en intercambios bilaterales pero también en el contexto de CARICOM y en el contexto de la Organización de Estados del Caribe Oriental (OECO). Y continuaremos trabajando centrándonos en áreas como la erradicación de la pobreza, la agricultura y el sector alimentario, la prevención y gestión de desastres, la adaptación al cambio climático y el fortalecimiento de las buenas prácticas en el sector público.   De hecho, estamos muy contentos de recibir a sus ministros allá que asistirán a algunas reuniones regionales vinculadas a algunos de estos asuntos, uno de ellos será en términos de asociación energética para Las Américas y el otro en una Convención Internacional sobre Áreas Marinas Protegidas. Y también habrá una oportunidad para intercambias nuestras experiencias con las suyas, en términos de pesca y otras temáticas.   Desde luego, para mí, como usted sabe, Primer Ministro, el Género es siempre un tema muy importante, y continuaremos trabajando en ello al precio que sea, y que por supuesto todas nuestras naciones logren lo antes posible que las mujeres que quieran iniciar un emprendimiento, puedan tener las posibilidades y capacidades para hacerlo.   Y también estamos pensando en nuestro comercio, y continuaremos discutiendo muchas temáticas, y una de las cosas es que hemos complementado nuestras economías: nosotros no tenemos el tipo de cosas que ustedes producen aquí, muchas de las ellas no las producimos en Chile, así que no somos rivales, de manera que podemos trabajar juntos. Y ya puedo imaginar que a los chilenos les encantará la posibilidad de consumir fantásticos camarones y langostas, y por supuesto plátanos y muchas otras cosas. Nosotros no las producimos, así que podemos mejorar y aumentar nuestras posibilidades en comercio.   Así que muchas gracias y espero que la hoja de ruta que tenemos, nos permita cumplirla, y que podamos lo antes posible firmar un acuerdo que fortalezca nuestros lazos.       Muchas gracias.