(Original Speech)    Ladies and gentleman, friends of the oceans:   Our commitment to prosperity and the wellbeing of our citizens cannot be disassociated from economic growth.  But by the same token, we must accept, once and for all, that there is no long term growth possible, nor can there be true development, without an active environmental protection policy.   A country with a coastline as long as ours, cannot be indifferent to the role of the ocean and the marine environment in our progress towards a sustainable and inclusive development. This is why, during my Government, we have worked actively to protect, conserve and use the ocean and its resources in a sustainable manner.   The Convention on the Law of the Sea represents the legal framework of all activities that take place in the ocean, especially those associated with conservation and sustainable use. This framework allows us to establish general guidelines to regulate different matters related to the ocean.   But it´s not enough. The need to raise awareness about the dangers that affect the ocean today is a challenge for all States, international organizations, the private sector and civil society. We need to continue to generate concrete actions to counter the threats posed by illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, the acidification of the ocean and marine pollution from plastics.   Thus, Chile has opted for contributing to the global governance of the oceans on multiple levels. For example, we have actively participated in the “Our Ocean" Initiative, hosting its second version and making commitments, such as joining the 1995 New York Agreement on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. We have also expanded our cooperation programs to include the management of coastal areas.   In addition, Chile led, along with France and Monaco, the "Because the Ocean" Declaration, recognizing the importance of the ocean in implementing the Paris Agreement, and urging countries to include efforts of ocean conservation in the framework of their climate policies.   Regarding MPAs, that’s Marine Protected Areas, I am proud to say that under my government we have increased by 10 the areas protected; or, if you prefer, the size of our protected exclusive economic zone has grown from 4,3% to 46%.   We are currently implementing MPAs in the Juan Fernández Archipelago; two in southern Chile, located in the Cape Horn and Seno Almirantazgo, as well as a multipurpose marine protected area around ??Easter Island, Rapa Nui. This last one will ensure the protection of the sea and its resources, while allowing the Rapa Nui islanders to continue to fish using their traditional methods. As a matter of fact, two of the female Rapa Nui leaders are here today among us.   Chile will once again be present at the fourth version of Our Ocean that will take place, of course, on October in Malta, as well we participated also in the High Level Conference on SDG14 last June.   Just a couple of weeks ago, the fourth International Congress of Marine Areas (IMPAC 4) was held in Chile. Among the participants at that event, as well as present in this room today, were the fishermen of the Juan Fernandez islands. They have developed a successful model of sustainable lobster fishing, which was recognized in 2015 with the international certification "Blue Seal" of the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) as the first artisanal fishery in Latin America.   We believe that in addition to generating mechanisms to protect the ocean, it is very important to generate policies aimed at fighting the various threats that affect the ocean. For example, we are currently implementing the policy to prevent, discourage and eliminate illegal, unreported and non-regulated fishing.   In the face of new challenges, we continue to push for the strengthening of international ocean governance. One way is to be actively engaged to move forward on the Third Implementation Agreement of the "United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea", to regulate conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond national jurisdictions.   Finally, I would like to highlight that we are working on our first National Oceanic Policy to harmonize and give coherence to our oceanic governance, catalyzing the action of the State, together with civil society and the private sector, all in relation with the SDG 14 and the other goals directly linked to it.   If I have mentioned what Chile has been doing, it is not because I am intented to be navel-gazing. On the contrary, it is to show that it can be done; and you know, the need to be big and rich countries to do what you think it is necessary to conserve the oceans.      Our future is linked to the ocean and as such, it demands our attention and actions now.   Thank you so much.    (Traducción)      Damas y caballeros, amigos de los océanos:   Nuestro compromiso con la prosperidad y el bienestar de nuestros ciudadanos no puede disociarse del crecimiento económico. Pero por lo mismo, debemos aceptar, de una vez por todas, que no es posible un crecimiento a largo plazo, ni tampoco un verdadero desarrollo, sin una política activa de protección del medio ambiente.   Un país con una costa tan larga como la nuestra, no puede ser indiferente al rol del océano y el medio ambiente marino en nuestro progreso hacia un desarrollo sostenible e inclusivo. Por eso, durante mi Gobierno, hemos trabajado activamente para proteger, conservar y utilizar el océano y sus recursos de manera sostenible.   La Convención sobre el Derecho del Mar representa el marco jurídico de todas las actividades que tienen lugar en el océano, especialmente las relacionadas con la conservación y el uso sostenible. Este marco nos permite establecer pautas generales para regular diferentes materias relacionadas con el océano.   Sin embargo, no es suficiente. La necesidad de sensibilizar sobre los peligros que afectan al océano hoy en día es un desafío para todos los Estados, las organizaciones internacionales, el sector privado y la sociedad civil. Necesitamos seguir generando acciones concretas para contrarrestar las amenazas que plantea la pesca ilegal, no declarada y no reglamentada, la acidificación de los océanos y la contaminación marina con plásticos.   Así, Chile ha optado por contribuir a la gobernabilidad mundial de los océanos en múltiples niveles. Por ejemplo, hemos participado activamente en la Iniciativa "Nuestro Océano", acogiendo su segunda versión y asumiendo compromisos, como la adhesión al Acuerdo de Nueva York sobre las Poblaciones de Peces Transzonales y Altamente Migratorios, de 1995. También hemos ampliado nuestros programas de cooperación para incluir la gestión de las zonas costeras.   Además, Chile impulsó, junto con Francia y Mónaco, la Declaración "Por el Océano", reconociendo la importancia del océano en la implementación del Acuerdo de París, e instando a los países a incluir los esfuerzos de conservación oceánica en el marco de sus políticas climáticas.   En lo que respecta a las AMP –es decir las Áreas Marinas Protegidas–me enorgullece decir que bajo mi Gobierno hemos aumentado en 10 las áreas protegidas; o, si lo prefiere, el tamaño de nuestra zona económica exclusiva protegida ha crecido de 4,3% a 46%.   Actualmente estamos implementando AMP en el Archipiélago Juan Fernández; dos en el sur de Chile, ubicadas en el Cabo de Hornos y Seno Almirantazgo, así como un área protegida marina multifuncional alrededor de la Isla de Pascua, Rapa Nui. Esto último garantizará la protección del mar y sus recursos, al mismo tiempo que permitirá a los pobladores de Rapa Nui seguir pescando con sus métodos tradicionales. De hecho, dos de las líderes femeninas de Rapa Nui están aquí entre nosotros.   Chile volverá a estar presente en la cuarta versión de Our Ocean que se llevará a cabo, por supuesto, en octubre en Malta, así como participamos también en la Conferencia de Alto Nivel sobre el ODS14 de junio pasado.   Hace apenas un par de semanas se realizó en Chile el IV Congreso Internacional de Áreas Marinas (IMPAC 4). Entre los participantes en ese evento, que también están presentes en esta sala hoy, estuvieron los pescadores de las Islas Juan Fernández. Ellos han desarrollado un modelo exitoso de pesca sostenible de langosta, que fue reconocido en 2015 con la certificación internacional "Blue Seal" del Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) como la primera pesquera artesanal en América Latina.   Creemos que además de generar mecanismos para proteger el océano, es muy importante generar políticas dirigidas a combatir las diversas amenazas que afectan al océano. Por ejemplo, actualmente estamos implementando la política para prevenir, desalentar y eliminar la pesca ilegal, no declarada y no regulada.   Ante los nuevos desafíos, seguimos impulsando el fortalecimiento de la gobernanza internacional de los océanos. Una forma de participar activamente es avanzar en el Tercer Acuerdo de Aplicación de la "Convención de las Naciones Unidas sobre el Derecho del Mar", para regular la conservación y la utilización sostenible de la biodiversidad marina más allá de las jurisdicciones nacionales.   Por último, quisiera destacar que estamos trabajando en nuestra primera Política Nacional Oceánica para armonizar y dar coherencia a nuestra gobernanza oceánica, catalizando la acción del Estado, junto con la sociedad civil y el sector privado, todo en relación con el ODS14 y los otros objetivos directamente vinculados a ella.   Si he mencionado lo que Chile ha estado haciendo, no es porque tenga la intención de ser autocomplaciente. Por el contrario, es para demostrar que se puede lograr; y ustedes saben, la necesidad de que los países grandes y ricos hagan lo que crean que es necesario para  conservar los océanos.   Nuestro futuro está ligado al océano y como tal, exige nuestra atención y acciones ahora.   Muchas gracias.