(Original Statement)   I would like to thank Prime Minister Trudeau for this opportunity, firstly for your warm welcome and also for this opportunity to visit Canada, a so importante likemind country and partner for Chile.   We had the opportunity exchange views about how to jointly adress present the challenges and uncertainties, but also to confirm our commitments to values like democracy, human rights, gender equality, women empowerment, the importance of peace and security in the world, the importance of multilateralism and also free trade among other issues that we have discussed.   One of the things that Prime Minister has not mentioned is that when we met when I came to Canada in 2012 to an UN Women activity, here he was introduced to me like, MP Justin Trudeau, a man with brilliant future they said, so it was very, I would say, they were talking about future Prime Minister.   Well, one of the things that we have discused is also the importance of ensuring women empowerment, woman equal rights as the rights of every person in the world, and also of course on the importance on women on peace-keeping operations and the impacts of those conflicts have on women and girls, and how women should be a part of the resolutions but also in the aftermaths that creates a long-term foundations for peace and security.   And also both our countries have been very committed to the Resolution 1325, adopted by United Nations in the year 2000 and the deals that we reach to this issue, that I was just mentioning to Prime Minister, that Chile was the first country in the region, Latin America, to adapt an Action Plan for its implementation in 2009, during my first government and during my second we are in the Second Action Plan, which is focusing particularly on prevention, participation, protection, reliefs and recovery.   And we are also Multilateralism World as member of the Group of Friends of Resolution 1325 that is shared by Canada.   Additionally, through the Colombian peace-process, which Chile accompanies, we called for the participation of women of all ages believing that gender perspective is a necessary component of any negotiation.   As a visible sign of this commitment is also that a part of troops they are Women who are participating UN political missions in Colombia, that oversees the implementation of the peace agreement.    Of course, we have talked also about the global challenges, and of course what to do in terms of different challenges that we are dealing with. And Chile and Canada are responding by strengheting and updating our 20 years old Free Trade Agreement to ensure that is more inclusive, progresive and benefitial for all our citizens.   In other words, with our ended-teenage FTA, we have become more responsive and responsible for 20 years old, but now we have improved the chapter on government precurement and investment, including provisions on corporate social responsabilities and negotiating new chapter on sanitary and fitosanitary measures, and technical barriers to trade.   In addition with signing a new chapter on gender and trade, as Prime Minister mentioned, and this not only recognizes the contribution of women to economic growht and sustainable development, but also of course both countries to promoting economic empowerment of women through training, access to financing, and leadership posts and the participation among other actions.   But that’s not all. Chile and Canada are strong supporters of the multilateral trade system and regional integration, PA, WTO, APEC, OECD or TPP; we have stood side by side, defending progressive free trade and importance of Asia Pacific as a new global center for investment and trade.   Canada has also been an active observer of the Pacific Alliance, the regional integration block –Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru–and in June 2016, signed with the Pacific Alliance and ambitious joint declaration and cooperation on areas such as environment, innovation and education.   And recently, Pacific Alliance went forward and created a new status, associated state, for these Asia Pacific countries who wants to enter into our high standard comprehensive trade agreement with the Pacific Alliance as a block. We will be pleased to welcome the minister of Trade of Canada to meeting between the Pacific Alliance and Observers state on occasion we will be all sharing these news with all 52 members, and of course we are hoping that Prime Minister could visit before I leave office, next year.   Thank you.     (Traducción)     Quisiera agradecer al Primer Ministro Trudeau por esta oportunidad, en primer lugar por su calurosa bienvenida y también por esta oportunidad de visitar Canadá, un país y un socio tan importante para Chile.   Tuvimos la oportunidad de intercambiar puntos de vista y cómo afrontar conjuntamente los desafíos y las incertidumbres, pero también confirmar nuestros compromisos con valores como la democracia, los derechos humanos, la igualdad de género, el empoderamiento de la mujer, la importancia de la paz y la seguridad en el mundo, el multilaterismo y también el libre comercio, entre otras cuestiones que hemos discutido.   Una de las cosas que el Primer Ministro no mencionó es que cuando nos reunimos cuando vine a Canadá en 2012 a una actividad de ONU Mujeres, aquí, me lo presentaron como el diputado Justin Trudeau, un hombre con un futuro brillante. Así que fue muy, diría yo, estaban hablando del Primer Ministro.   Una de las cosas que hemos discutido es también la importancia de garantizar el empoderamiento de la mujer, la igualdad de derechos de la mujer, así como los derechos de cada persona en el mundo; y también, por supuesto, la importancia de las mujeres en las operaciones de mantenimiento de la paz y los impactos que los conflictos tienen sobre las mujeres y las niñas, y cómo las mujeres deben ser parte de las resoluciones, pero también como luego crean una base a largo plazo para la paz y la seguridad.   Y también nuestros países han estado muy comprometidos con la Resolución 1325, adoptada por Naciones Unidas en el año 2000 y los acuerdos que alcanzamos a este respecto –que acababa de mencionar al Primer Ministro– que Chile fue el primer país de la región, América Latina, en adaptar un Plan de Acción para su implementación en 2009, durante mi primer Gobierno, y durante mi segundo mandato, estamos en el Segundo Plan de Acción, que se centra especialmente en prevención, participación, protección, socorro y recuperación.   Y también somos parte del multilateralismo, como miembros del Grupo de Amigos de la Resolución 1325, que es compartido por Canadá.   Además, a través del proceso de paz en Colombia, que Chile acompaña, pedimos la participación de mujeres de todas las edades, creyendo que la perspectiva de género es un componente necesario de cualquier negociación.   Como signo visible de este compromiso es también que una parte de las tropas son mujeres que participan en las misiones políticas de la ONU en Colombia, que supervisa la aplicación del acuerdo de paz.   Por supuesto, también hemos hablado de los desafíos globales y, por supuesto, de lo que hay que hacer en términos de los diferentes desafíos con los que nos enfrentamos. Y Chile y Canadá están respondiendo reforzando y actualizando nuestro Acuerdo de Libre Comercio de 20 años para asegurar que sea más inclusivo, progresivo y beneficioso para todos nuestros ciudadanos.      En otras palabras, con nuestro TLC ya terminando su adolescencia, hemos llegado a ser más receptivos y responsables por 20 años, pero ahora hemos mejorado el capítulo sobre inversiones y adquisiciones gubernamentales, incluyendo disposiciones sobre responsabilidades sociales corporativas, y negociando un nuevo capítulo sobre medidas sanitarias y fitosanitarias, además de barreras técnicas para el comercio.   Además de la firma de un nuevo capítulo sobre género y comercio, como lo mencionó el Primer Ministro, y esto no sólo reconoce la contribución de las mujeres al crecimiento económico y al desarrollo sostenible, sino también que los dos países, desde luego, promueven el empoderamiento económico de las mujeres mediante la capacitación, el financiamiento, posiciones de liderazgo y la participación, entre otras acciones.   Pero eso no es todo. Chile y Canadá son fuertes partidarios del sistema multilateral de comercio y la integración regional, la AP, la OMC, el APEC, la OCDE o el TPP, nos hemos puesto de pie al lado del otro, defendiendo el libre comercio progresivo y la importancia de Asia Pacífico como un nuevo centro mundial para la inversión y el comercio.   Canadá también ha sido un observador activo de la Alianza del Pacífico, el bloque de integración regional -Chile, Colombia, México y Perú- y en junio de 2016 firmó con la Alianza del Pacífico una ambiciosa declaración conjunta y de cooperación en áreas como el medio ambiente, la innovación y la educación.   Recientemente, la Alianza del Pacífico siguió adelante y creó un nuevo estatus, el Estado Asociado, para estos países de Asia Pacífico que quieren entrar en nuestro acuerdo comercial global de alto nivel, con la Alianza del Pacífico como bloque. Estaremos encantados de dar la bienvenida al ministro de Comercio de Canadá a la reunión entre la Alianza del Pacífico y los Estados Observadores, en la ocasión que todos estaremos compartiendo estas noticias con los 52 miembros. Y por supuesto que esperamos que el primer ministro pueda visitar antes de que deje mi cargo, el próximo año.   Muchas gracias.