Dear friends:   I want to thank firstly to Council of Foreign Relations for this opportunity to share with you some reflections on the global challenges we face from a southern perspective, from a middle income country that has traditionally being an active player in foreign affairs.     Let me begin by briefly sketching the world we are seeing from Chile.   The current international order, if we can call it that way, is no longer that relatively predictable one of the post-war, when the United Nations and the Bretton Woods organizations were created. We are witnesses of a post-cold war world, one in which humanity is facing mounting threats such as terrorism, cyberterrorism, climate change, pandemics, and even what we saw cold-war left behind, the threat of nuclear warfare as exemplified by North Korea last actions.   We live in a digital era that has accelerated the future at an amazing speed. We have seen incredible advances in many new fields, such as the Internet, artificial intelligence, 3D printing, driverless transport, among others.   Technological progress has transformed world economy. It is Innovation and new products, services and business models that drive success, not cheap labour or physical capital. It is digital over the financial or physical capital.   A global middle class has arisen partially because of open trade, interconnectivity, and technological acceleration. However, discrimination, nationalism and xenophobia are also on the rise, leaving many behind.   Globalization continues to have many discontents because the fruits of the progress and innovation haven’t been an evenly distributed.   Borders disappear as millions worldwide connect around the world at much lower costs, linking up through multiple social networks, allowing us to experience the hope, frustrations, despair and rage of others directly and in real time, and empowering citizens to question institutions and political leaders.   In Latin America, as all over the world, citizens are taking to the streets to demand change, citing the lack of response by the traditional political structure as the detonator. Corruption aggravates the scenario.   The current international context increases the complexity we face. There is justifiable concern about the slowdown of the world economy and the falling of commodity prices, which still drive the economy of most Latin American countries. Security concerns and lack of opportunities drive thousands of people to migrate to neighbouring countries, placing an additional strain on public services. The impact of climate change on more frequent and severe natural disasters left thousands without homes or livelihoods.    What can Chile do?   In the face of these global challenges, we have identified four priority areas for Chile’s foreign policy.   First, to counter protectionism, we have decided to deepen our openness to the world, adding value to our exports and updating our trade agreements to ensure that new issues are covered. It is an imperative for Chile to make a transition from an economic model based on the extraction and export of natural resources to one focused on creativity and innovation. Thus, we must have the capacity to generate good ideas, and new technologies, and at the same time, we must ensure inclusive societies to avoid an unequal distribution of benefits.   Second, we have to contribute to global governance, to build a world with clear rules and vigorous multilateralism; one in which all sectors (States, civil society, the private sector) have a role to play and alliances to make.   As relatively, the countries’ respect for international law and governance are key factors.    Third, we must promote a pragmatic regionalism, what we used to call convergence in diversity. Latin America and the Caribbean is from where we should speak to the world and offer as much as possible a common vision, one which reflects our realities, needs and challenges.  We understand that diverse economic and political perspectives coexist in our region, however, we are also sure that we can find a common agenda on the issues where consensus is possible.    Fourth, democracy and human rights must be protected and strengthened. The promotion and protection of Human Rights, as well as respect for the rule of law, the democratic system and due process, constitute a permanent goal of our foreign policy.   Our actions: Then what have we done to pursue these objectives?   Since 1990, Chile´s integration into the international community has been characterized by an open trade policy. The result is 26 trade agreements, with 64 countries representing over 60% of the world's population and over 85% of global GDP.   This strategy has boosted economic growth, created jobs and reduced poverty. However, today we need to make another leap forward: to diversify our productive matrix, to broaden the scope of our trade agreements and to boost our productivity agenda.   In the last year, we have negotiated a free trade agreement with Uruguay and modernized our long-standing and successful trade agreement with Canada, introducing in both cases new issues, such as a chapter of Women and Trade, focused on empowering women economically.  We are also finishing a trade liberalization agreement with Argentina, which we are certain will boost our bilateral trade, as well as open up new opportunities for investors.   Following the departure of the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), Chile convened a successful ministerial meeting with the participation of 15 countries of the Pacific Rim to discuss on how to proceed. As a result of that initiative, the 11 remaining signatories of the TPP have met in a number of occasions and at the November´s APEC meeting, and we will make a decision on the road forward.   Within the Pacific Alliance, you know the four members are –from north to south– Mexico, Colombia, Peru and Chile, decided to take a major step, beginning negotiations as a bloc with Asia Pacific countries, which will become Associated States of the Alliance, once high standard trade agreements have been reached. The first four candidates are Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Singapore and the negotiating process will begin this October.   In addition, the Pacific Alliance and MERCOSUR are implementing, we call convergence in diversity, an action plan that seeks to bridge the divide between the Pacific and Atlantic shores, opening up and facilitating trade in the region.  There is also a common road map for forging stronger links between the Pacific Alliance and ASEAN.   Additionally, Chile is working to become a platform country between Asia and Latin America. With that purpose, in May of this year, we participated in the High-Level Dialogue of the One Belt, One Road (OBOR) Forum, what people call the Silk Route, and only two Latin-American countries were invited to that forum and they were Chile and Argentina, and why is that so, because at that time Chile was Pro-Tempore President of the Pacific Alliance and Argentina was the Pro-Tempore President of MERCOSUR, so both, President Macri and me participated in this activity. China, as you probably well know, is our main trade partner and bilateral ties are deeply concerned in recent years, we are members of the APEC, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum, we will be organizing the 2019 Summit; and, in 2016, we adhered to Peace and Cooperation Treaty of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).   With the European Union, we are long-term partners and allies in issues such as human rights, democracy, transparency, gender, sustainable development and protection of the environment; and, the European Union is our third largest trading partner and investor. And the US is our second partner and investor, or maybe in investment the US is the first. The modernization of our 14-year-old Association Agreement with the EU is a priority. We expect to hold the first round of negotiations before the end of this year.   But what have we been doing to contribute to global governance?   Chile has made a strong contribution to multilateralism and global governance in important areas, such as climate change, oceans and Antarctica, among other issues. In the past, we were active actor in the decolonization process and the creation of the human rights system.        We believe that reducing emissions and increasing our adaptation capacities is not only urgent, it´s essential. The best available science indicates that at this rate of emissions, current levels of prosperity and wellbeing will be severely affected by future climate scenarios, creating costs and causing damages that far outweigh any investment.   Political will and collaborative work are the best tools for dealing with climate change.   We must discard the notion that the money spent on addressing climate change is somehow a cost that goes against economic growth. On the contrary, we need to understand how this funding will promote a new growth, one that is sustainable and respectful of environmental protection.   Chile is among the 146 States that have ratified the Paris Agreement to fight the dangers of Climate Change. Through its Nationally Determined Contribution, we undertook the commitment to reduce by 30% the country’s intensity of emissions per unit of GDP by 2030, and up to 45%, if we could count with international support.   Our commitment and clear public policies have led to a surge of clean energy sources, especially from solar and wind. We have benefitted from declining prices of the associated technologies. But we have also done our part, by generating the right incentives in the industry, widening the market opportunities for new investors and implementing policies based on transparency and clear rules.   This transformation is happening very quickly. Solar energy has evolved from being almost insignificant in our energy production in 2014 to become 7% of all the energy produced in Chile.   In our case, this is particularly significant. While energy production represents 35% of global emissions, in Chile the energy sector represents 70% of our emissions, twice as much.   The Paris Agreement is an ambitious result of the realization that the world cannot continue relying on fossil fuels.   The current levels of concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere make almost certain that we will keep witnessing the disruption in the climate patterns and extreme whether events, such as Hurricane Irma in the Caribbean and Florida.   These trends are a clear indication that we need to work in our resilience and adaptive capacities.   Any climate change strategy needs to be seen as an opportunity of advancing towards a new social pact, one that points to achieving sustainable patterns of production and consumption and is based in social justice.   With this in mind, alliances and partnerships are fundamental. The Paris Agreement is a victory for all of us. Nevertheless, at the same time, we would like to see it as a global framework for new agreements that respond to specific needs that can come from regions, countries or communities.   And Chile is working in this direction. We look forward to contribute to the 2019 Climate Summit under the leadership of the Secretary General of the UN, to generate further action and to embrace the opportunities to advance to a cleaner and more prosperous future.   We have recently presented the National Action Plan on Climate Change, which includes 16 specific objectives with its corresponding lines of action, which will materialize in 96 measures.   In this environmental framework, ocean protection is also a key concern for Chile. I don’t know how many of you have an opinion on our country, but we have a very long coast, very long, and it even is cold I have to say, but it is very long, so oceans for us are very important and their effects. Throughout our history, we have always had a maritime vocation, and we are certain that in the ocean and its resources, lays a great proportion of our future.   The role of the ocean has been largely neglected in international climate discussions, this despite that the fact that the oceans provides for all for having oxygen we breath and the ocean captures almost one third of global emissions.    To counter this, we have actively participated in the “Our Ocean" Initiative, hosting its second version and making commitments, such as joining the 1995 New York Agreement on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.   Last June, we participated in a High-Level Conference at the UN, related to the implementation of SDG 14; and we recently hosted the Fourth International Marine Protected Areas Congress.   In addition, Chile led, along with France and Monaco, the "Because the Ocean" Declaration, recognizing the importance of the ocean in implementing the Paris Agreement, and urging countries to include efforts of ocean conservation in the framework of their climate policies.  Close to 30 countries have signed unto this Declaration.   And regarding MPAs, I am proud to say that under my government we have increased by 10 the areas protected; or, if you prefer, the size of our protected exclusive economic zone has grown from 4,3% to 46%.     This transforms Chile into the country with the highest percentage of Marine Protected Spaces in the world.  And I am not saying, as we say “OK, we are the first”, it is that I hope this incentives a lot of others countries to do the same.   At the national level, we are designing an Ocean Policy, which should be complete by the end of the year.   Regarding Antarctica, last year we had the honour of hosting the Thirty-Ninth Meeting and the Ninth Meeting. On that opportunity, we adopted the Declaration of Santiago, a firm commitment to take care of the Antarctic environment and its dependent ecosystems.   Another very important achievement was the approval of the establishment of a Marine Protected Area in Antarctica covering an area of 1.5 million square kilometres –that is, twice the size of mainland Chile-, creating the largest reserve on the planet and enjoying protection for a period of 35 years from December 2017.   Let me mention something about the American citizen Douglas Tompkins, who unfortunately died a couple of years ago, because he left a lot of parks in Chile so we made a deal, they put one third, a very important part, we put two third and so we created huge national parks, we conserve the park but also it will be for the joy the people.      Let me mention something about regional integration and convergence in diversity.   I mentioned already, I have been talking a little about Pacific Alliance.  The Pacific Alliance has allowed us to put into practice the concept of Convergence in Diversity. That is, that instead of emphasizing our differences, we focus on our commonalities. As I mentioned before, Chile put this into effect by promoting joint initiatives between the Pacific Alliance and the Southern Common Market - MERCOSUR.   But, we have also sought to implement this pragmatic approach at the bilateral level. Last July, for the first time in our history, we held a Binational Cabinet of Ministers of Chile and Peru. We are also cooperating at the sub regional level on migratory and security issues. We are working closely with Argentina on infrastructure, energy, trade, migration and other issues.   With Bolivia, we are settling our differences in the International Court of Justice. Notwithstanding this, we have carried out what we call a silent integration because trade has increased, Chilean investments in Bolivia have risen; there is a new Bolivian airline that has been authorized to operate in Chile. Bolivian students come, many of them with scholarships, to study in our universities; and the Bolivian community is one of the largest that has made Chile its second home.   With Brazil and Paraguay, we are advancing in the implementation of a Bioceanic Corridor between Puerto Murtinho and the ports of northern Chile, while migratory and mobility issues have been central to our discussions with Ecuador.   We are committed to continue supporting, if I would day, the implementation of Colombian peace process. After accompanying the negotiations with the FARC for years, we now participate with more than 60 observers in UN Political Mission that is verifying the implementation of the peace accord.  We are also guarantors on the ongoing negotiations between the government and the smaller groups of ELN.   And, after 13 years, we have withdrawn our troops from Haiti, although we will continue to cooperate with their authorities to achieve security and stability on the island.   In fact, we are active cooperative donors and also with Centro American, our Strategy for International Cooperation for Development 2015-2018 prioritizing Latin America and the Caribbean in human capital formation and technical assistance. We have closely worked with the United States, Japan and Mexico, in projects for Central American countries; and with CARICOM, implementing a series of initiatives aimed at protecting its marine areas and creating greater resilience to natural disasters.   But we also have developed a cooperation plan with African countries and we have created the Nelson Mandela scholarships that permits people who want to do master degree can go to Chile on areas where they need it, of course paid by Chilean government.     And a little about Democracy and Human Rights, Chile has a deep concern for fundamental norms and values of democracy and Human Rights particularly in our region. This focus is not affecting our view of principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other countries.   This is the reason why we see with great concern what happens in Venezuela. We have individually and collectively declared ourselves in favour of negotiation solutions to the current crisis, with full restoration of the democratic constitutional order and the Rule of Law and based on credible dialogue with Venezuela, but with the support of the international community.   Chile has been active in defence the sexual minorities, promoting gender equality and address in emerging human rights problems.   By the way, just in case, Chile is candidate to the Human Rights Council, for the period 2018-2020. That’s a commercial, anyway. Our country agrees with the UN Secretary General's vision in regards to the pillars of peace, sustainable development and human rights, which form a triad that is inextricably linked to the progress in the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda.   At the national level, we have implemented the first National Human Rights Plan, as well as the First Action Plan on Business and Human Rights.   So let me end by saying these are some of our main actions in the foreign policy arena, we have much more but I have tried not takes so long. Underlying our initiatives is the recognition that we live in an increasingly interconnected and complex world, which presents us with challenges that can be addressed only in a concerted fashion.   Chile has the fundamental goal of being present and aware of world’s challenges; to work closely with others to develop common solutions to global challenges.   Thank you so much.      (Traducción)        Queridos amigos:   Quiero agradecer en primer lugar al Consejo de Relaciones Exteriores por esta oportunidad de compartir con ustedes algunas reflexiones sobre los desafíos globales que enfrentamos, desde una perspectiva meridional, de un país de ingresos medios que tradicionalmente ha sido un activo actor en asuntos exteriores.   Permítanme comenzar brevemente esbozando el mundo que estamos viendo desde Chile.  El orden internacional actual, si es que podemos llamarlo así, ya no es aquel relativamente predecible de la posguerra, cuando se crearon las Naciones Unidas y las organizaciones de Bretton Woods. Somos testigos de un mundo posterior a la Guerra Fría, en el que la humanidad se enfrenta a amenazas crecientes como el terrorismo, el ciberterrorismo, el cambio climático, las pandemias e incluso lo que vimos dejó la Guerra Fría, la amenaza de la guerra nuclear, ejemplificada con las últimas acciones de Corea del Norte.   Vivimos en una era digital que ha acelerado el futuro a una velocidad increíble. Hemos visto avances increíbles en muchos nuevos campos, como Internet, inteligencia artificial, impresión 3D, transporte sin conductor, entre otros.   El progreso tecnológico ha transformado la economía mundial. Es la innovación y nuevos productos, los servicios y modelos de negocio que impulsan el éxito, no la mano de obra barata o el capital físico. Es lo digital sobre el capital físico o financiero.   Una clase media global ha surgido en parte debido al comercio abierto, la interconectividad y la aceleración tecnológica. Sin embargo, la discriminación, el nacionalismo y la xenofobia también están en aumento, dejando a muchos atrás.   La globalización sigue teniendo a muchos descontentos porque los frutos del progreso y la innovación han sido uniformemente distribuidos.   Las fronteras desaparecen a medida que millones de personas en todo el mundo se conectan a un costo mucho menor, conectándose a través de múltiples redes sociales, permitiéndonos experimentar la esperanza, las frustraciones, la desesperación y la rabia de otros directamente y en tiempo real, y capacitar a los ciudadanos para cuestionar instituciones y líderes políticos.   En América Latina, como en todo el mundo, los ciudadanos se toman las calles para exigir el cambio, citando como detonador la falta de respuesta de la estructura política tradicional. La corrupción agrava el escenario.   El actual marco internacional aumenta la complejidad que enfrentamos. Existe una preocupación justificable por la desaceleración de la economía mundial y la caída de los precios de las materias primas, que siguen impulsando la economía de la mayoría de los países latinoamericanos. Las preocupaciones de seguridad y la falta de oportunidades llevan a miles de personas a emigrar a los países vecinos, poniendo una presión adicional sobre los servicios públicos. El impacto del cambio climático sobre los desastres naturales más frecuentes y graves, ha dejado a miles sin hogares ni medios de subsistencia.   ¿Qué puede hacer Chile?   Frente a estos desafíos globales, hemos identificado cuatro áreas prioritarias para la política exterior de Chile.   En primer lugar, para contrarrestar el proteccionismo, hemos decidido profundizar nuestra apertura al mundo, agregando valor a nuestras exportaciones y actualizando nuestros acuerdos comerciales para asegurar que los nuevos temas estén cubiertos. Es un imperativo para Chile hacer una transición de un modelo económico basado en la extracción y exportación de recursos naturales a uno centrado en la creatividad y la innovación. Por lo tanto, debemos tener la capacidad de generar buenas ideas y nuevas tecnologías, y al mismo tiempo, debemos asegurar sociedades inclusivas para evitar una distribución desigual de los beneficios.   En segundo lugar, tenemos que contribuir a la gobernanza global, construir un mundo con reglas claras y un multilateralismo vigoroso; uno en el que todos los sectores (Estados, sociedad civil, sector privado) tengan un rol que desempeñar y alianzas a establecer.   Al respecto el respeto de los países por el derecho internacional y la gobernanza son factores clave.   En tercer lugar, debemos promover un regionalismo pragmático, lo que solemos llamar Convergencia en la Diversidad. Es desde América Latina y el Caribe de donde deberíamos hablar al mundo y ofrecer en lo posible una visión común, que refleje nuestras realidades, necesidades y desafíos. Entendemos que coexisten diversas perspectivas económicas y políticas en nuestra región, sin embargo, también estamos seguros que podemos encontrar una agenda común sobre temas donde se posible tener un consenso.    En cuarto lugar, la democracia y los derechos humanos deben ser protegidos y fortalecidos. La promoción y protección de los Derechos Humanos, así como el respeto al Estado de Derecho, el sistema democrático y el debido proceso constituyen un objetivo permanente de nuestra política exterior.   Nuestras acciones: Entonces, ¿qué hemos hecho para lograr estos objetivos?   Desde 1990, la integración de Chile en la Comunidad Internacional se ha caracterizado por tener una política comercial abierta. El resultado son 26 acuerdos comerciales, con 64 países que representan más del 60% de la población mundial y más del 85% del PIB mundial.  Esta estrategia ha impulsado el crecimiento económico, creado empleos y reducido la pobreza. Sin embargo, hoy necesitamos dar otro salto: diversificar nuestra matriz productiva, ampliar el alcance de nuestros acuerdos comerciales y aumentar nuestra agenda de productividad.   En el último año, hemos negociado un acuerdo de libre comercio con Uruguay y modernizado nuestro exitoso acuerdo comercial de larga data con Canadá, introduciendo en ambos casos nuevos temas, como un Capítulo de Mujeres y Comercio, centrado en empoderar económicamente a las mujeres. También estamos finalizando un acuerdo de liberalización comercial con Argentina, el cual estamos seguros impulsará nuestro comercio bilateral, así como abrirá nuevas oportunidades para los inversionistas.   Después de la salida de Estados Unidos del Acuerdo Transpacífico de Cooperación Económica (TPP), Chile convocó a una exitosa reunión ministerial con la participación de 15 países de la Cuenca del Pacífico para discutir sobre cómo proceder. Como resultado de esa iniciativa, los 11 firmantes restantes del TPP se han reunido en varias ocasiones y en la Reunión APEC de noviembre, y tomaremos una decisión sobre el camino a seguir.   Dentro de la Alianza del Pacífico, ustedes saben, los cuatro miembros son –de norte a sur–  México, Colombia, Perú y Chile, decidieron dar un paso importante, iniciando las negociaciones como bloque con los países de Asia Pacífico, que se convertirán en Estados Asociados de la Alianza, una vez que se hayan alcanzado acuerdos comerciales de alto nivel. Los cuatro primeros candidatos son Australia, Canadá, Nueva Zelanda y Singapur y el proceso de negociación comenzará en octubre.   Además, la Alianza y el MERCOSUR están implementando, lo que llamamos convergencia en la diversidad, un plan de acción que busca cerrar la brecha entre las costas del Pacífico y el Atlántico, abriendo y facilitando el comercio en la región. También hay una hoja de ruta común para forjar vínculos más fuertes entre la Alianza del Pacífico y la ASEAN.   Además, Chile está trabajando para convertirse en un país plataforma entre Asia y América Latina. Con ese propósito, en mayo de este año, hemos participado en el Diálogo de Alto Nivel del Foro One Belt, One Road (OBOR), que la gente llama la Ruta de la Seda, y sólo dos países latinoamericanos fueron invitados a ese foro y fueron Chile y Argentina, y ello se debió a que en ese momento Chile era Presidente Pro-Tempore de la Alianza del Pacífico y Argentina era Presidente Pro-Tempore del MERCOSUR, así que ambos, el Presidente Macri y yo participamos de esa actividad. China, como ustedes probablemente saben muy bien, es nuestro principal socio comercial y los lazos bilaterales se han profundizado en los últimos años. Somos miembros de APEC, estaremos organizando la Cumbre 2019. Y en 2016 nos adherimos al Tratado de Paz y Cooperación de la Asociación de Naciones del Sudeste Asiático (ASEAN).   Con la Unión Europea, somos socios de larga data y aliados en temas como los derechos humanos, la democracia, la transparencia, el género, el desarrollo sostenible y la protección del medio ambiente; y la Unión Europea es nuestro tercer socio comercial e inversor. Y los Estados Unidos son nuestros segundos socios e inversores, o quizás en inversión son los primeros. La modernización de nuestro Acuerdo de Asociación de 14 años con la UE, es una prioridad. Esperamos realizar la primera ronda de negociaciones antes de fin de año.   Pero, ¿qué hemos estado haciendo para contribuir a la gobernanza mundial?   Chile ha hecho una fuerte contribución al multilateralismo y a la gobernanza mundial en áreas importantes, como el cambio climático, los océanos y la Antártida, entre otros temas. En el pasado, fuimos actores en el proceso de descolonización y creación del sistema de derechos humanos.   Creemos que la reducción de emisiones y el aumento de nuestras capacidades de adaptación no sólo son urgentes, sino esenciales. La mejor ciencia disponible indica que con esta tasa de emisiones, los niveles actuales de prosperidad y bienestar serán severamente afectados por futuros escenarios climáticos, creando costos y causando daños que superan con creces cualquier inversión.   La voluntad política y el trabajo colaborativo son las mejores herramientas para hacer frente al cambio climático.   Debemos descartar la idea de que el dinero gastado en abordar el cambio climático es, de alguna manera, un costo que va en contra del crecimiento económico. Por el contrario, debemos entender cómo esta financiación promoverá un nuevo crecimiento, sostenible y respetuoso con la protección del medio ambiente.   Chile es uno de los 146 Estados que han ratificado el Acuerdo de París para luchar contra los peligros del cambio climático. A través de su Contribución Nacionalmente Determinada, hemos asumido el compromiso de reducir en un 30% la intensidad de emisiones del país por unidad de PIB para 2030, y hasta un 45% si contáramos con apoyo internacional.  Nuestro compromiso y claras políticas públicas han llevado a un aumento de fuentes de energía limpia, especialmente de energía solar y eólica. Nos hemos beneficiado de la disminución de los precios de las tecnologías asociadas. Pero también hemos hecho nuestra parte, generando los incentivos adecuados en la industria, ampliando las oportunidades de mercado para nuevos inversores y aplicando políticas basadas en transparencia y reglas claras.   Esta transformación está ocurriendo muy rápidamente. La energía solar ha evolucionado de ser casi insignificante en nuestra producción de energía en 2014, para convertirse en el 7% de toda la energía producida en Chile.   En nuestro caso, esto es particularmente significativo. Si bien la producción de energía representa el 35% de las emisiones globales, en Chile el sector energético representa el 70% de nuestras emisiones, el doble.   El Acuerdo de París es un resultado ambicioso de la comprensión de que el mundo no puede seguir dependiendo de los combustibles fósiles.   Los actuales niveles de concentración de gases de efecto invernadero en la atmósfera hacen casi seguro que seguiremos presenciando la interrupción en los patrones climáticos y extremos, eventos como el huracán Irma en el Caribe y Florida.   Estas tendencias son una clara indicación de que necesitamos trabajar en nuestra resiliencia y capacidad de adaptación.   Toda estrategia de cambio climático debe considerarse como una oportunidad para avanzar hacia un nuevo pacto social, que apunte a lograr patrones sostenibles de producción y consumo, y se base en la justicia social.   Con esto en mente, las alianzas y asociaciones son fundamentales. El Acuerdo de París es una victoria para todos nosotros. Sin embargo, al mismo tiempo, nos gustaría verlo como un marco global para nuevos acuerdos que respondan a necesidades específicas que pueden venir de regiones, países o comunidades.   Y Chile está trabajando en esta dirección. Esperamos contribuir a la Cumbre sobre el Clima de 2019 bajo el liderazgo del Secretario General de la ONU, para generar más acciones y aprovechar las oportunidades para avanzar hacia un futuro más limpio y más próspero.   Recientemente, hemos presentado el Plan de Acción Nacional sobre Cambio Climático, que incluye 16 objetivos específicos con sus líneas de acción correspondientes, que se materializarán en 96 medidas.   En este marco ambiental, la protección del océano es también una preocupación clave para Chile. No sé cuántos tienen opinión sobre nuestro país, pero tenemos una costa muy larga, muy larga, incluso  hace frío tengo que decirlo, pero es muy larga, así que los océanos son muy importantes para nosotros y sus efectos. A lo largo de nuestra historia, siempre hemos tenido una vocación marítima, y estamos seguros de que en el océano y sus recursos se encuentra una gran proporción de nuestro futuro.   El rol del océano ha sido, en gran parte, descuidado en las discusiones internacionales del clima, a pesar del hecho de que los océanos nos proveen de todo para el oxígeno que respiramos y que los océanos capturan casi un tercio de las emisiones globales.   Para contrarrestar esto, hemos participado activamente en la Iniciativa "Nuestro Océano", acogiendo su segunda versión y asumiendo compromisos, como la adhesión al Acuerdo de Nueva York de 1995 sobre las poblaciones de peces transzonales y altamente migratorias.   En junio pasado, participamos en una Conferencia de Alto Nivel en la ONU, relacionada con la implementación del ODS 14; y recientemente acogimos el Cuarto Congreso Internacional de Áreas Marinas Protegidas.   Además, Chile impulsó, junto con Francia y Mónaco, la Declaración "Por el Océano", reconociendo la importancia del océano en la implementación del Acuerdo de París, e instando a los países a incluir los esfuerzos de conservación oceánica en el marco de sus políticas climáticas. Cerca de 30 países han firmado esta Declaración.   Y en cuanto a las AMP, me enorgullece decir que bajo mi gobierno hemos aumentado en 10 las áreas protegidas; o, si lo prefiere, el tamaño de nuestra zona económica exclusiva protegida ha crecido de 4,3% a 46%.   Esto convierte a Chile en el país con el más alto porcentaje de espacios marinos protegidos en el mundo. Y no lo estoy diciendo, como que digamos “Qué bien, somos los primeros”, es porque espero que con esto incentivemos a muchos otros países a hacer lo mismo.    A nivel nacional, estamos diseñando una Política Oceánica, que debería estar completa a finales de año.   En cuanto a la Antártida, el año pasado tuvimos el honor de acoger la 39° Reunión y la 9° Reunión. En esa oportunidad, aprobamos la Declaración de Santiago, un firme compromiso de cuidar el medio ambiente antártico y sus ecosistemas dependientes.   Otro logro muy importante fue la aprobación del establecimiento de un Área Protegida Marina en la Antártida que cubre una superficie de 1,5 millones de kilómetros cuadrados –es decir, el doble de la superficie continental de Chile–, creando la reserva más grande del planeta y disfrutando de protección durante un período de 35 años a partir de diciembre de 2017.   Permítanme mencionar algo sobre el ciudadano estadounidense Douglas Tompkins, que por desgracia murió hace un par de años, porque dejó muchos parques en Chile, así que llegamos a un acuerdo, ellos pusieron un tercio –una parte muy importante– nosotros  colocamos dos tercios y así que creamos enormes parques nacionales, conservamos el parque, pero también será para que la gente lo disfrute.   Permítanme mencionar algo sobre integración regional y convergencia en la diversidad.   Ya mencioné, he hablado ya un poco sobre la Alianza del Pacífico. La Alianza del Pacífico nos ha permitido poner en práctica el concepto de Convergencia en la Diversidad. Es decir, que en vez de enfatizar nuestras diferencias, nos enfoquemos en nuestros puntos en común. Como mencioné anteriormente, Chile puso en práctica esta iniciativa promoviendo iniciativas conjuntas entre la Alianza del Pacífico y el Mercado Común del Sur (MERCOSUR).   Pero también hemos buscado implementar este enfoque pragmático a nivel bilateral. En julio pasado, por primera vez en nuestra historia, tuvimos un Gabinete Binacional de Ministros de Chile y Perú. También estamos cooperando a nivel subregional en temas migratorios y de seguridad. Estamos trabajando estrechamente con Argentina en materia de infraestructura, energía, comercio, migración y otros temas.   Con Bolivia, estamos solucionando nuestras diferencias en la Corte Internacional de Justicia. A pesar de esto, hemos llevado a cabo lo que llamamos una integración silenciosa, porque el comercio ha aumentado, las inversiones chilenas en Bolivia han aumentado; existe una nueva aerolínea boliviana autorizada para operar en Chile. Vienen estudiantes bolivianos, muchos de ellos con becas, para estudiar en nuestras universidades; y la comunidad boliviana es una de las más grandes que ha hecho de Chile su segundo hogar.   Con Brasil y Paraguay avanzamos en la implementación de un Corredor Bioceánico entre Puerto Murtinho y los puertos del norte de Chile, mientras que los temas migratorios y de movilidad han sido centrales en nuestras conversaciones con Ecuador.   Estamos comprometidos a continuar apoyando, yo diría, la implementación del proceso de paz colombiano. Después de acompañar las negociaciones con las FARC por años, participamos ahora con más de 60 observadores en la Misión Política de la ONU que está verificando la implementación del acuerdo de paz. También somos garantes en las negociaciones en curso entre el Gobierno y grupos más pequeños del ELN.   Y, después de 13 años, hemos retirado nuestras tropas de Haití, aunque seguiremos cooperando con sus autoridades para lograr la seguridad y la estabilidad en la isla.   De hecho, somos activos donantes de cooperación también con Centroamérica, nuestra Estrategia para la Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo 2015-2018 está priorizando América Latina y el Caribe en la formación de capital humano y asistencia técnica. Hemos trabajado estrechamente con Estados Unidos, Japón y México, en proyectos para los países centroamericanos; y con la CARICOM, implementando una serie de iniciativas dirigidas a proteger sus áreas marinas y crear mayor resiliencia a los desastres naturales.   Sin embargo, también hemos desarrollado un plan de cooperación con países africanos y hemos creado las becas Nelson Mandela, que permita que la gente que quiera hacer maestrías puedan ir a Chile en áreas donde ellos lo necesiten, por supuesto a cargo del Gobierno de Chile.    Y un poco respecto a democracia y derechos humanos, Chile tiene una profunda preocupación por las normas y valores fundamentales de la democracia y los derechos humanos. Este enfoque no afecta nuestra visión sobre el principio de no intervención en los asuntos internos de otros países.   Ésta es la razón por la que vemos con gran preocupación lo que ocurre en Venezuela. Nos hemos declarado individual y colectivamente a favor de soluciones democráticas a la actual crisis, con plena restauración del orden democrático constitucional y el Estado de Derecho y basado en un diálogo creíble con Venezuela, pero con el apoyo de la Comunidad Internacional.   Chile ha permanecido active en la defensa de las minorías sexuales, promoviendo la igualdad de género y abordando los problemas de derechos humanos que surgen.   A propósito, por si acaso,  Chile es candidato al Consejo de Derechos Humanos, para el período 2018-2020. De cualquier forma, ése fue un aviso comercial. Nuestro país está de acuerdo con la visión del Secretario General de la ONU en lo que respecta a los pilares de la paz, el desarrollo sostenible y los derechos humanos, que forman una tríada inextricablemente ligada al progreso de la Agenda de Desarrollo Sostenible de 2030.   A nivel nacional, hemos implementado el Primer Plan Nacional de Derechos Humanos, así como el Primer Plan de Acción de Negocios y Derechos Humanos.   Así que déjenme finalizar señalando que éstas son algunas de nuestras principales acciones en el ámbito de la política exterior, tenemos muchas más, pero he tratado de no alargarme. La base de nuestras iniciativas es el reconocimiento de que vivimos en un mundo cada vez más interconectado y complejo, que nos presenta desafíos que sólo pueden abordarse de manera concertada.   Chile tiene el objetivo fundamental de estar presente y consciente de los desafíos del mundo; a trabajar en estrecha colaboración con otros para desarrollar soluciones comunes a los retos mundiales.   Muchas gracias.