(Original Speech)      Question 1: About what Chile is doing about gender equality LGBT Agenda    Thank you, Zanny, I am very happy to be here with all of you.   Yes, we have been working in our country in terms of trying to ensure that everyone, regardless of whom they love or which gender identity that they identify, that they can have the same rights and same opportunities, and they were not discriminated or subject of it.   So, and this is something that it has linked with you have discussed with Tom, it needs political leadership, but it also need the LGBT Community to be very strongly, I would say, defending their rights and the possibilities.          So, in 2012, we had two events: I mean, there was an idea for a law against discrimination by any kind of situation gender, sexual orientation, religion, etc., but it didn’t go very fast the discuss in Congress. So we had two situations, Interamerican Human Rights Court decided that State cannot no protect a judge who was a lesbian and they took the children, the Judiciary System here, to the children did not permit they stay with their mother, because she was a lesbian. And in the other hand, there was a young boy Daniel Zamudio, who was killed by a bunch of guys, because he was a gay. So that kind of situation horrified the society and the political groups, so they decided to approve this law against discrimination, you know.   But afterwards, we started discussing an issue of how we could make that couples live together and have the same rights as a marriage couple. So, in 2015, we enacted a law that created the Civil Union Agreement, which can be celebrated equally by same-sex or different sex-couples. And this Civil Union grants the civil partners have a marital status, their families, their social security, and they have hereditary rights, among other benefits that were only in the former legislation reserved to married people. So far, 10.872 couples have celebrated this agreement, with a 24% of same-sex couples. That was.   In a country like Chile, that is a little conservative, you had to advance step by step.   So that was our first milestone, but we have been working towards seeking complete equality. That is why we are currently undergoing a broad and participative citizen process, towards the drafting of a bill that will introduce equal marriage in our country. And we intent to send in the first semester of this year.   But we are also discussing a gender identity bill at Parliament that will allow transgender people to rectify their birth registration and identification documents according to their gender identity.   I know that we are going probably slower than we would like to, but this is a process. A process that it changes dramatically. In my first term, I mean, you would not get the approval, the support that has today. Today, 62% of Chileans believe that same-sex couples also have the rights to marry. So, I think we have been advancing culturally and we have worked together with LGBT Community, Government and Congress to help going in the direction for more fair country.      Question 2: It is interesting, I mean, you say you have gone step by step, but it is slow in some sense, how far you’ve come, I mean, Chile is, as you say, a conservatory country, I think it was in 2004, Chile was the last country in the West in legalize the divorce. That’s only just over a decade ago, this is very conservative country that is coming the equality way, and do you expect your equality bill pass this year?        President Bachelet: Well, we will sent it to Congress this year, but probably it will have time, because in 2014, I sent the bill to decriminalize abortion for three causes and it still is on discussion, two years later. So, this is at a slow pace, but we are going to trying to move it, I mean, to move towards the direction of equal rights for everyone.     Question 3: What tips can you give for how to advance in Gender? You were finally director of UN Woman; you have been a historic champion in gender equality. Does that experience equip you to think about how to advance the LGBT Agenda and what advices you give? Because there are many business leaders here, who are thinking about how you do this particularly in your country which is more conservative.   President Bachelet: Well, I think one of the more difficult things is the culture change, and I can say it also because I just came a meeting from a group of women corporate directors, and in our country we also try to include more women as directors in boards of companies, and it is not easy.   We have given the example and I think one thing is important, you mentioned with Tom, leadership, and you have given an example in government, so you can introduce policies, and we are working on terms of changing our programs and policies that they have not considered the LGBT experience and particularly that it includes and to make them more access to all, and more adequate to their necessities and their realities.       So, one thing is what you can do inside government, including this perspective, as I’ve worked for many years to include the gender perspective in all the policies and programs, and also the particular, I would say, views and needs of the LGBT Community.   On the other hand, you have given an example also not only through policies, but also to include people in high level positions that are people come from LGBT Community, because I’ve seen also when I worked at the National Commission of HIV, that culture is very difficult to change but when you can show -and the same happens with women that has to be always saying that they are capable and show they are capable- when people gets used to the idea to work together. It is not easy sometimes for workers, I mean, for businesses to include some workers who are a trans (sexual), or I can imagine for a baker to make wedding cake with two grooms or two brides, but I think it’s a process.     But I think it’s a process, and I think firstly you need to have the courage to go forwards this agenda, secondly, you need to give the example and you need to create institutional bases and also the legal bases to fight against discrimination and to incentivize the possibilities of equality.          On the other hand, when the crisis was there, I went to Davos, everybody was saying that diversity of our future of the economy and the future of challenges that society and the world was gonna confront, diversity is one of the central issues. And diversity is many different things, it means men/women, people from different regions working on a company, but also it means including this sexual diversity, because of course you can have better products, you can have another perspective and others experiences.   But also, you know, I have here some numbers according to the Chilean LGBT Chamber of Commerce and Tourism, the LGBT population of our country moves around US$ 2.700 million per year, and concentrate their spending in tourism, leisure, technology and personal consumption goods. Also, it is estimated that a LGBT tourist spends 8 to 10 times more than the average tourist.   So, there is a world of success and opportunities for business, and to understand this is a great opportunity.    Question 4: About election of Donald Trump and how his politics abroad could affect the agenda, how do you see Chile’s growth, both within in the Americas and the world, more broadly as these politics spread?     President Bachelet: Well, you know Chile is a country that has been successful thanks to a big, huge amount of free trade agreement. Everywhere, Chile is the country that has more free trade agreements in the world, and we have been able, I would say, to improve our economy, our GDP, etc.   So, everywhere where I go, and without with the other members of the Pacific Alliance, we will be sharing what we think about this issue, I would say, advocating for this issue as well as the whole human rights agenda, including LGBT Community.   So, as President, I mean, we respect what happens in every country, but we are very respectfully we will be for in making the voices be heard.           (Traducción)      Pregunta 1: Respecto a que está haciendo Chile sobre agenda de igualdad de género y LGBT.   Gracias, Zanny, estoy muy feliz de estar aquí con todos ustedes.   Sí, hemos estado trabajando en nuestro país en términos de tratar de asegurar que todos, independientemente de a quién ellos amen o de la identidad de género que los identifiquen, puedan tener los mismos derechos y las mismas oportunidades y no que no sean discriminados ni sujetos a discriminación.   Y esto es algo que ha estado vinculado con lo que tú has discutido con Tom, que se necesita liderazgo político, pero también se necesita que la Comunidad LGBT sea muy fuerte, diría yo, para defender sus derechos y posibilidades.   Por lo tanto, en 2012, tuvimos dos eventos, me refiero, existía la idea de una Ley Antidiscriminación para cualquier tipo de situación de género, orientación sexual, religión, etc., pero no se aceleró la discusión en el Congreso, hasta que tuvimos dos situaciones: La Corte Interamericana de Derechos Humanos decidió que el Estado no podía no proteger a un jueza que era lesbiana y quitarle a sus hijas, y que el Sistema Judicial de aquí, no les permitiese a las niñas quedarse con su madre, porque era lesbiana. Y por otra parte, hubo un muchacho joven Daniel Zamudio, que fue asesinado por un grupo de individuos, porque era un gay. Así que ese tipo de situación horrorizó a la sociedad y a los grupos políticos, por lo que decidieron aprobar esta Ley Antidiscriminación, ya sabes.     Pero después, comenzamos a discutir el tema de cómo podíamos hacer que las parejas vivieran juntas y tuvieran los mismos derechos que una pareja matrimonial. Así que, en 2015, promulgamos una ley que creó el Acuerdo de Unión Civil, que puede ser celebrado igualmente por parejas del mismo sexo o de diferente sexo. Y esta Unión Civil otorga a los socios civiles un estado civil, que tengan sus familias, su seguro social, y tengan derechos hereditarios, entre otros beneficios que sólo se encontraban, en la antigua legislación, reservados a las personas casadas. Hasta el momento, 10.872 parejas han celebrado este acuerdo, con un 24% de parejas del mismo sexo. Así fue.   En un país como Chile, que es un poco conservador, tienes que avanzar paso a paso.   Así que ése fue nuestro primer hito, pero hemos estado trabajando para buscar la igualdad completa. Es por eso que actualmente estamos en un proceso ciudadano amplio y participativo, hacia la redacción de un proyecto de ley que introducirá el matrimonio igualitario en nuestro país. Y tenemos la intención de enviarlo en el primer semestre de este año.   Pero también estamos discutiendo un proyecto de ley de identidad de género en el Parlamento, que permitirá a los transexuales rectificar su registro de nacimiento y documentos de identificación de acuerdo con su identidad de género.   Sé que vamos probablemente más lento de lo que nos gustaría, pero éste es un proceso. Un proceso de cambios drásticos. En mi primer período, no habrías logrado la aprobación, el apoyo que se tiene hoy. Hoy en día, el 62% de los chilenos creen que las parejas del mismo sexo también tienen derecho a casarse. Por lo tanto, creo que hemos avanzado culturalmente y hemos trabajado junto con la Comunidad LGBT, el Gobierno y el Congreso, para ayudar a ir en la dirección de un país más justo.   Pregunta 2: Es interesante, usted dice que han ido paso a paso, pero es lento en cierto sentido, hasta que tan lejos han llegado, me refiero a que Chile es, como usted dice, un país conservador, creo que fue en 2004, cuando Chile fue el último país en Occidente en legalizar el divorcio. Eso es sólo hace poco más de una década, es un país muy conservador que está tomando el camino de la igualdad, y ¿usted cree que su proyecto de ley de igualdad sea aprobado este año?   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, lo enviaremos al Congreso este año, pero probablemente tomará tiempo, porque en 2014, envié el proyecto de ley para despenalizar el aborto por tres causales y todavía está en discusión, dos años después. Por lo tanto, esto va a un ritmo lento, pero vamos a tratar de moverlo, me refiero, para que avance hacia la dirección de la igualdad de derechos para todos.   Pregunta 3: ¿Qué consejos puede dar para avanzar en la temática de  Género? Finalmente, usted fue directora de UN Woman; usted ha sido una defensora histórica en la igualdad de género. ¿Esa experiencia le ha permitido pensar en cómo avanzar en la Agenda LGBT y qué consejos podría darnos? Porque hay muchos líderes empresariales aquí, que están pensando en cómo se hace esto, en particular en su país, que es más conservador.   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, creo que una de las cosas más difíciles es el cambio cultural, y también puedo decirlo porque acabo de reunirme con un grupo de mujeres directoras de empresas, y en nuestro país también tratamos de incluir a más mujeres, como directoras en los directorios, y no es fácil.   Hemos dado el ejemplo y creo que una cosa importante, usted lo mencionó con Tom, el liderazgo y usted ha dado un ejemplo en el gobierno, de forma que pueda introducir políticas, y estamos trabajando en términos de cambiar nuestros programas y políticas que no son consideran la experiencia LGBT y que en particular incluyan y sean más accesibles a todos, y más adecuados a sus necesidades y sus realidades.   Por lo tanto, una cosa es lo que usted puede hacer dentro del gobierno, incluyendo esta perspectiva, ya que he trabajado durante muchos años para incluir la perspectiva de género en todas las políticas y programas, y también las opiniones y necesidades particulares de la Comunidad LGBT.    Por otro lado, usted ha dado un ejemplo no sólo a través de políticas, sino también para incluir a personas en puestos de alto nivel que sean personas de la Comunidad LGBT, porque también he visto cuando trabajé en la CONASIDA, que la cultura es muy difícil de cambiar, pero cuando se puede mostrar -y lo mismo ocurre con las mujeres que tienen que estar siempre diciendo que son capaces y demuestran que son capaces- cuando la gente se acostumbra a la idea de trabajar juntos. No es fácil a veces para los trabajadores, me refiero, para las empresas incluir a algunos trabajadores que sean transexual, o puedo imaginar lo que es para un panadero el hacer la torta de bodas con dos novios o dos novias.   Pero creo que es un proceso, y creo que en primer lugar hay que tener el coraje de seguir adelante con esta agenda; en segundo lugar, hay que dar el ejemplo; y es necesario crear bases institucionales y también las bases legales para luchar contra la discriminación e incentivar las posibilidades de igualdad.   Por otro lado, cuando la crisis se produjo, fui a Davos, y todos hablaban sobre la diversidad, de nuestro futuro de la economía y el futuro de los desafíos que la sociedad y el mundo iban a enfrentar, y la diversidad es uno de los temas centrales. La diversidad es muchas cosas diferentes, se refiere a hombres/mujeres, personas de diferentes regiones que trabajan en una empresa, pero también se refiere a incluir esta diversidad sexual, porque por supuesto usted puede tener mejores productos, usted puede tener otra perspectiva y otras experiencias.   Pero también tengo algunas cifras, según la Cámara de Comercio y Turismo LGBT de Chile, la población LGBT de nuestro país mueve alrededor de US $2.700 millones al año y concentra su gasto en turismo, ocio, tecnología y consumo personal de bienes. Además, se estima que un turista LGBT gasta de 8 a 10 veces más que el turista medio.   Por lo tanto, hay un mundo de éxito y oportunidades para los negocios, y para entender que esto es una gran oportunidad.   Pregunta 4: Respecto a la elección de Donald Trump y cómo sus políticas de exterior pueden afectar la agenda, ¿cómo ve usted el crecimiento de Chile, tanto dentro de las Américas como en el mundo, a medida que estas políticas se extienden?   Presidenta Bachelet: Bueno, usted sabe que Chile es un país que ha tenido éxito gracias a una gran y enorme cantidad de acuerdo de libre comercio. En todas partes, Chile es el país que tiene más acuerdos de libre comercio en el mundo, y hemos podido, diría yo, mejorar nuestra economía, nuestro PIB, etc.   Por lo tanto, en todas partes donde voy, y aparte de los otros miembros de la Alianza del Pacífico, estaremos compartiendo lo que pensamos acerca de este tema, yo diría, abogando por este tema, así como toda la agenda de derechos humanos, incluida la Comunidad LGBT.   Por lo tanto, como Presidenta, me refiero a que respetamos lo que sucede en cada país, pero estamos muy respetuosamente por hacer que las voces sean escuchadas.