(Original Speech)    Mr. Vice President:   It is an honor to receive you and your delegation in Chile during your, if I would say, South American Tour. Your visit highlights the will of our countries to strengthen our ties through friendship, cooperation and mutual understanding.   This visit does not only bring our two nations closer, but also envisions a continent which works together to continue growing, collaborating and developing.   Today, Latin Americans are witnessing major political, economic and social changes, as are our friends in North America. Time has shown that the best way to deal with these developments is to continue to work toward peace, respect and development.   Our countries face many challenges, but with support and above all, respect for sovereignty and reaffirming our commitment to the promotion and the defense of democracy and human rights, through dialogue and negotiation, we can find the path to sustainable and equitable development for our citizens.   Chile and the United States have built a friendship based on these principles, which have led us towards a solid relationship in the last two decades.   Without a doubt, our conversation today, Mr. Vice President, will further strengthen our ties.   Our countries are moving toward a new stage bilaterally. We have a FTA, which provides duty-free access to all our goods, we have been able to implement a successful Visa Waiver Program and we are developing joint cooperation projects in Central America.   I am certain that these issues we have touched upon today will allow us to build an enhanced bilateral agenda; one grounded on cooperation, energy, education, science and technology, innovation and environmental protection.   Finally, I would like to thanks the United States, on my country’s behalf, for the assistance provided during the massive forest fires that affected our country in the beginning of this year.   So, I would call for a toast for strengthening the friendship and cooperation between Chile and the US.   Cheers!     (Traducción)      Señor Vicepresidente:   Es un honor recibirlo a usted y a su delegación en Chile durante su, yo diría, Gira Sudamericana. Su visita destaca la voluntad de nuestros países por fortalecer nuestros lazos a través de la amistad, la cooperación y el entendimiento mutuo.   Esta visita no sólo aproxima a nuestras dos naciones, sino que también contempla un continente que trabaja en conjunto para continuar creciendo, colaborando y desarrollándose.   Hoy, los latinoamericanos están siendo testigos de importantes cambios políticos, económicos y sociales, como lo es con nuestros amigos en América del Norte. El tiempo ha demostrado que la mejor manera de lidiar con estos desarrollos es continuar trabajando hacia la paz, el respeto y el desarrollo.   Nuestros países enfrentan muchos desafíos, pero con apoyo y sobre todo respeto a la soberanía y reafirmando nuestro compromiso con la promoción y defensa de la democracia y los derechos humanos, a través del diálogo y la negociación, podemos encontrar el camino hacia un desarrollo sostenible y equitativo para nuestros ciudadanos.   Chile y Estados Unidos han construido una amistad basada en estos principios, que nos han llevado a una sólida relación en las últimas dos décadas.   Sin lugar a dudas, nuestra conversación de hoy, Señor Vicepresidente, fortalecerá aún más nuestros vínculos.   Nuestros países están avanzando hacia una nueva etapa, desde una perspectiva bilateral. Tenemos un TLC que provee acceso libre de impuestos a todos nuestros productos, hemos sido capaces de implementar un exitoso Programa de Exención de Visas y estamos desarrollando proyectos de cooperación conjunta en Centroamérica.   Estoy segura de que estos temas que hemos abordado hoy nos permitirán construir una agenda bilateral mejorada; una basada en la cooperación, la energía, la educación, la ciencia y la tecnología, la innovación y la protección del medio ambiente.   Por último, quisiera agradecer a los Estados Unidos, en nombre de mi país, por la asistencia prestada durante los masivos incendios forestales que afectaron a nuestro país a principios de este año.   Así que pido brindemos por el fortalecimiento de la amistad y la cooperación entre Chile y los Estados Unidos.