(Original Speech)  It is an honor for us, for Chile to be a partner in this initiative that represents, in same way, new efforts of the Green Global Growth Forum, which recognized the crucial role of public-private partnerships for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for the Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement.  We believe the balance between economic growth and the protection of the environment is at the heart of the discussion about the future of the planet. Although the SDGs and the Paris Agreement have given the international community a common framework, we still need to take concrete actions.  The P4G initiative builds on the shared view that sustainable development and climate change are central elements in building a common vision for our prosperity. Greater economic progress cannot be at the expense of our environment. Without a paradigm shift, we believe that scenes of devastation caused by natural disasters will continue to be almost weekly events.  A commitment based solely on governmental actions is not enough; we must build public-private partnerships to foster a dialogue that will transform our patterns of production and consumption.  This is exactly what we have chosen to do over the last few years in my country. We pledged in our Nationally Determined Contribution to reduce its CO2 emissions by 30% per unit of GDP by 2030, compared to the level achieved in 2007. And if we would sum international cooperation it might get closer to 45%.  We are working already very decisively in this direction. In 2014, we approved a carbon tax in the context of tax reform. We also have made great progress in the energy sector, the source of 80% of our emissions. Today, we can proudly say that 50% of all the newly installed capacity in the country is non-conventional renewable energy. Moreover, last year, 75% of the new energy was non -conventional renewable energy.  Soon, one line of Santiago´s subway will be run on solar energy.  Until 2013, we faced one of the highest prices of energy generation in the region due to lack of competition and outdated regulations. The energy policy reform has made it possible to lower energy prices for the benefit of our population but also for the competitiveness of our productive sector.  All of these reasons allow us to recognize that a low carbon growth strategy is suitable for Chile, but it also can be good business as well. Better air quality in our cities, energy independence and the facilitation of a more efficient and competitive economy are just a few of its benefits.  We hope that starting today, the P4G initiative can allow us to identify –as Prime Minister has mentioned– new and better opportunities, while at the same time finding effective solutions to global challenges. Above all, we want to see a coalition of countries and non-state actors that believe that economic growth, environmental protection and the participation of communities must go hand by hand, if we truly want to secure our progress for generations to come.  Thank you so much and we will be doing a good job.    (Traducción)    Es un honor para nosotros, para Chile, ser socio en esta iniciativa que representa, de alguna forma, nuevos esfuerzos del Green Global Growth Forum, que reconoce el papel crucial de las alianzas público-privadas para el logro de la Agenda 2030 para el Desarrollo Sostenible y el Acuerdo de París.  Creemos que el equilibrio entre el crecimiento económico y la protección del medio ambiente está en el centro de la discusión sobre el futuro del planeta. Aunque los ODS y el Acuerdo de París han dado un marco común a la comunidad internacional, todavía debemos tomar medidas concretas.  La Iniciativa P4G se basa en la visión compartida de que el desarrollo sostenible y el cambio climático son elementos centrales para construir una visión común para nuestra prosperidad. No puede haber un mayor progreso económico a expensas de nuestro medio ambiente. Sin un cambio de paradigma, creemos que las escenas de devastación causadas por desastres naturales seguirán siendo eventos prácticamente semanales.  No es suficiente un compromiso basado únicamente en las acciones gubernamentales: debemos construir asociaciones público-privadas para fomentar un diálogo que transformará nuestros patrones de producción y consumo.  Esto es exactamente lo que hemos optado por hacer en los últimos años en mi país. Nos comprometimos en nuestra Contribución Nacional Determinada a reducir sus emisiones de CO2 en un 30% por unidad de PIB para 2030, en comparación con el nivel alcanzado en 2007. Y si sumáramos la cooperación internacional, podría aproximarse al 45%.  Estamos trabajando muy decididamente en esta dirección. En 2014, aprobamos un impuesto sobre el carbono en el contexto de la Reforma Tributaria. También hemos logrado grandes avances en el sector energético, fuente del 80% de nuestras emisiones. Hoy podemos decir con orgullo que el 50% de toda la capacidad recién instalada en el país, es energía renovable no convencional. Además, el año pasado, el 75% de la nueva energía era energía renovable no convencional. Pronto, una línea del metro de Santiago funcionará con energía solar.  Hasta 2013, nos enfrentamos a uno de los mayores precios de generación de energía en la región debido a la falta de competencia y regulaciones obsoletas. La reforma de la política energética ha permitido reducir los precios de la energía en beneficio de nuestra población pero también de la competitividad de nuestro sector productivo.  Todas estas razones nos permiten reconocer que una estrategia de crecimiento con baja emisión de carbono es adecuada para Chile, pero también puede ser un buen negocio. Una mejor calidad del aire en nuestras ciudades, la independencia energética y la facilitación de una economía más eficiente y competitiva son sólo algunos de sus beneficios.  Esperamos que a partir de hoy, la Iniciativa P4G nos permita identificar -como ha mencionado el Primer Ministro- nuevas y mejores oportunidades, y al mismo tiempo encontrar soluciones eficaces a los desafíos mundiales. Sobre todo, queremos ver una coalición de países y actores no estatales que creen que el crecimiento económico, la protección ambiental y la participación de las comunidades deben ir mano a mano, si realmente queremos asegurar nuestro progreso para las generaciones venideras.  Muchas gracias, haremos un buen trabajo.