(Original Speech)    Honorable Andrew Holness, Prime Minister of Jamaica:   I would like to welcome you and your delegation to Chile.   I had the pleasure of seeing you a year ago, when I participated as a special guest at the Meeting of the Heads of State of CARICOM. On that occasion, we confirmed that democracy, the rule of law, an open economy, and the respect and promotion of human rights are pillars to our societies.    At the same time, we acknowledged that we face similar challenges, as do most of the countries in our region. The impact of climate change, inequality, migratory pressures, insecurity, are all part of our daily life and as middle–income countries. Also, we face increased restrictions to financing and development assistance to address some of these issues.   As members of the community of American nations, we have a duty to cooperate and work together, as well as to protect our environment and biodiversity for future generations. For these reasons, we are committed to deepen our political, economic, trade, and cultural ties.   And I am certain that progressive integration and cooperation projects can make a difference when seeking to achieve a prosperous and inclusive future for our peoples. This is why we have already signed today an agreement on sport and physical activity, and a Memorandum of Understanding on Trade and Investment Promotion.   We celebrate this visit where we have discussed a full and productive agenda, reviewing bilateral interests, regional issues and multilateral areas and Cooperation for Development has been at the center of our dialogue.  Chile has been a longtime partner for Jamaica´s development through initiatives such as Spanish language training for teachers, as well as courses, seminars, and workshops. The cooperation program focuses on four main issues: social development, agriculture and food security, natural disaster prevention and Institutional strengthening and modernization.    I was telling to Prime Minister that Chile has a PhD in disasters and emergencies so we can share all those experiences.      We are pleased to see that a former student of the Andres Bello Diplomatic Academy, Ms. Shorna-Kay Richards is now a member of the Jamaican delegation. She participated in the international training program for diplomats in Chile and now holds an important position in the Ministry.   We have much to do together. After our meeting in Guyana last year, we realized that we needed to broaden our cooperation with Jamaica. This is why we included new programs for disaster prevention and adaptation to climate change. We are also carrying out a program related to the protection of the marine environment, an issue dear to both of our countries.   In addition, at last June´s General Assembly Meeting of the Organization of American States, Chile announced the contribution of US $ 250,000 for the Fellowship Scholarship Program to OAS for Caribbean countries, including Jamaica.   All of these initiatives are aligned with our foreign policy priorities and our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Our Ocean Initiative.   Prime Minister:     This visit –as you mentioned– has been very fruitful and it is another step towards deeper bilateral relations and the integration of the American countries. So we thank you for taking the time to come to Chile.   So allow me to raise my glass in a toast, to the friendship between Jamaica and Chile.   For the friendship of Jamaica and Chile, cheers!    (Traducción)      Honorable Andrew Holness, Primer Ministro de Jamaica:   Quisiera darle la bienvenida a usted y a su delegación a Chile.   Tuve el placer de verlo hace un año, cuando participé como invitada especial en la Reunión de Jefes de Estado de la CARICOM. En esa ocasión, confirmamos que la democracia, el Estado de Derecho, una economía abierta y el respeto y promoción de los derechos humanos son pilares de nuestras sociedades.   Al mismo tiempo, reconocemos que enfrentamos desafíos similares, al igual que la mayoría de los países de nuestra región. El impacto del cambio climático, la desigualdad, las presiones migratorias, la inseguridad forman parte de nuestra vida cotidiana y de los países de ingresos medios. Además, nos enfrentamos a mayores restricciones a la financiación y la asistencia para el desarrollo para abordar algunas de estas cuestiones.   Como miembros de la comunidad de las naciones americanas, tenemos el deber de cooperar y trabajar juntos, así como de proteger nuestro medio ambiente y la biodiversidad para las generaciones futuras. Por estas razones, estamos comprometidos a profundizar nuestros lazos políticos, económicos, comerciales y culturales.   Y estoy segura de que los progresivos proyectos de integración y cooperación pueden hacer la diferencia cuando se trata de lograr un futuro próspero e inclusivo para nuestros pueblos. Es por eso que hoy ya hemos firmado un Acuerdo sobre Deporte y Actividad física, y un Memorando de Entendimiento sobre Comercio e Promoción de Inversiones.   Celebramos esta visita donde hemos debatido una agenda completa y productiva, revisando los intereses bilaterales, los asuntos regionales y las áreas multilaterales y la Cooperación para el Desarrollo ha estado en el centro de nuestro diálogo.  Chile ha sido un socio de largo plazo para el desarrollo de Jamaica a través de iniciativas como la capacitación en español para maestros, así como cursos, seminarios y talleres. El programa de cooperación se centra en cuatro temas principales: desarrollo social, agricultura y seguridad alimentaria, prevención de desastres naturales y fortalecimiento institucional y modernización.   Le estaba contando al Primer Ministro que Chile “tiene un doctorado” en desastres y emergencias, así que podemos compartir aquellas experiencias.   Nos complace ver que una ex estudiante de la Academia Diplomática Andrés Bello, la Sra. Shorna-Kay Richards es ahora miembro de la delegación de Jamaica. Participó en el Programa Internacional de Capacitación para Diplomáticos en Chile y ahora ocupa un cargo importante en el Ministerio.   Tenemos mucho que hacer juntos. Después de nuestra reunión en Guyana el año pasado, nos dimos cuenta de que necesitábamos ampliar nuestra cooperación con Jamaica. Es por eso que incluimos nuevos programas para la prevención de desastres y la adaptación al cambio climático. También estamos llevando a cabo un programa relacionado con la protección del medio ambiente marino, una temática muy querida por ambos países.   Además, en la última Reunión de la Asamblea General de la Organización de los Estados Americanos celebrada en junio, Chile anunció la contribución de US $ 250.000 para el Programa de Becas de la OEA para Países del Caribe, incluido Jamaica.   Todas estas iniciativas están alineadas con nuestras prioridades de política exterior y nuestro compromiso con la Agenda 2030 para el Desarrollo Sostenible, el Acuerdo de París sobre el Cambio Climático y la Iniciativa Our Ocean.   Primer Ministro:   Esta visita –como usted señaló– ha sido muy fructífera y es otro paso hacia profundas relaciones bilaterales y la integración de los países americanos. Por lo tanto, le agradecemos por tomarse el tiempo para venir a Chile.   Así que permítame levantar mi copa en un brindis, por la amistad entre Jamaica y Chile.   ¡Por la amistad de Jamaica y Chile, Salud!