(Original Speech)      Dear Friends:   Let’s imagine a country which concentrates almost three quarters of the world’s capabilities for astronomical observation; a country that presents itself proudly to the world as a leader in clean energies; a country that due to its unique features and good infrastructure is a renowned tourist destination.   A country with a strong scientific community, well known for its achievements, as well as for creating new technologies for new industries.  One where knowledge is the cornerstone for development and curiosity and creativity molds its national culture.   That country is the Chile we want, the one we dream about.  It is one, which starts to take form and which in less than a decade will not be an idea but a reality.   Here, in the Atacama Desert, through this symbolic beginning, we are building more than a telescope: we are witnessing an example of the possibilities that science and technology can achieve, and the skills we can gain through international cooperation.   This is yet another example of how human beings always want to go beyond the present, to explore what we cannot understand.  It´s the quest what has driven science for centuries, isn´t it?   Behind the nearly 40-meter-wide mirror that will explore the vast heavens from this corner of the world, there is a country with open doors; there are 15 Member States of the European Southern Observatory, which have joined forces; there are national and international researchers who have prepared projects; there are authorities that have given strong support, notwithstanding political differences. What we have here are women and men who have come together to give birth to an idea which will benefit us all.   We are beginning to see the results of years of work. There is a mixture of relief, longing, and expectation.   In these skies, unique for their quality, we can study the first structures formed in the Universe or identify new planets. But there are many more questions yet to be asked and some we haven´t even thought of. The truth is that we are opening a new eye for science and I am sure there will be many questions that will find their answer in our country.   There are some good news regarding the connection between the Central Interconnected System and the observation sites of Cerros Paranal and Armazones. By 2018, both observatories won’t need their own generators and will receive a stable, reliable, and cleaner connection.   Thus, we will incorporate the E-ELT into our energy grid, increasingly fueled by renewable sources. In fact, its flexible structure will allow us to generate clean energies right here in the future.   This will be part of a larger story and timeline. In the last fifty years, Chile has been developing a broad astronomical policy, much in close cooperation with ESO. We have had the opportunity to learn how to link each of the extraordinary scientific developments taking place in our country with the progress we want to achieve.   Central to this process has been the creation of a national scientific community, which stands out for its impact index. Maria Teresa is one of those who have taken Chilean science to the highest spheres. But moreover I would say to the lowest spheres, what I mean, she is doing a great work with children get involved them in astronomy, so we can have future astronomers, engineers, scientists and son on. And thank you Maria Teresa for that too.     We have opened additional areas of research, with great potential for expansion. In a couple of years, astronomy will be the science that will require the biggest capacity for data storage and analysis in the country. Accordingly, CORFO is exploring the feasibility of turning Chile into a player of "Big Data", based on our new installed capacity.   But we need to go faster, to go beyond strengthening the work we have done.   Astronomy must be an area of inspiration to all the children of Chile, as well as a space that brings together diverse actors and contributes in a systematic way to the development of our industries.   There is evidence that illustrates the gap we need to fill: of all the investment in astronomical projects in Chile, only 20% is carried out by national companies. This is why, the Ministry of Economy is seeking to promote our national industry, creating spaces for collaboration in technological businesses related to astro-engineering or astrophysics.   But in tourism, we want to diversify the tourist experience, as one strategy for achieving international standards. Antofagasta has the potential to promote astronomical tourism, through the convergence of regional actors and events, such as the next Latin American Astronomy Meeting, to be held in 2019, here in Antofagasta.   In other words, the country we imagine will be less distant and more tangible. The gigantic mirror that will rise from this place will also allow us to see ourselves as a society, as an international community, as humanity.   For all of it, thank you very much.    (Traducción)      Queridos amigos:   Imaginemos un país que concentra casi las tres cuartas partes de las capacidades mundiales de observación astronómica; un país que se presenta con orgullo al mundo como líder en energías limpias; un país que debido a sus características únicas y buena infraestructura es un destino turístico de renombre.   Un país con una fuerte comunidad científica, reconocida por sus logros, así como por la creación de nuevas tecnologías para nuevas industrias. Uno donde el conocimiento es la piedra angular para el desarrollo y la curiosidad, y la creatividad moldea su cultura nacional.   Ese país es el Chile que queremos, el que soñamos. Es uno que empieza a tomar forma y que en menos de una década no será una idea sino una realidad.   Aquí, en el Desierto de Atacama, con el inicio simbólico de estas obras, lo que se levanta aquí es más que un telescopio: aquí vemos uno de los mayores exponentes de las posibilidades de la ciencia y la tecnología, y de las capacidades que se pueden lograr con la cooperación internacional.   Éste es otro ejemplo de cómo los seres humanos siempre quieren ir más allá del presente, para explorar lo que no podemos entender. Es la búsqueda lo que ha impulsado la ciencia durante siglos, ¿no?   Detrás del espejo de casi 40 metros de ancho que explorará los vastos cielos desde este rincón del mundo, hay un país con puertas abiertas; hay 15 Estados Miembros del Observatorio Europeo Austral, que han unido sus fuerzas; hay investigadores nacionales e internacionales que han preparado proyectos; hay autoridades que han dado un fuerte apoyo, a pesar de las diferencias políticas. Lo que tenemos aquí son mujeres y hombres que se han unido para dar a luz una idea que nos beneficiará a todos.   Estamos empezando a ver los resultados de años de trabajo. Hay una mezcla de alivio, anhelo y expectativa.   En estos cielos, únicos por su calidad, podemos estudiar las primeras estructuras formadas en el Universo o identificar nuevos planetas. Pero hay muchas más preguntas por hacer y otras en las que ni siquiera hemos pensado. La verdad es que estamos abriendo un nuevo ojo para la ciencia y estoy segura de que habrá muchas preguntas que encontrarán su respuesta en nuestro país.   Hay algunas buenas noticias sobre la conexión entre el Sistema Interconectado Central y los sitios de observación de los Cerros Paranal y Armazones. Para el 2018, ambos observatorios no necesitarán sus propios generadores y recibirán una conexión estable, confiable y limpia.   De esta forma, incorporaremos el E-ELT en nuestra red de energía, alimentada cada vez más por fuentes renovables. De hecho, su estructura flexible nos permitirá generar energías limpias, aquí mismo, en el futuro.   Estas noticias se inscriben en una historia y un horizonte más amplio. En los últimos 50 años, Chile ha venido desarrollando una amplia política astronómica, en estrecha colaboración con la ESO (sigla en inglés para Observatorio Europeo Austral). Hemos tenido la oportunidad de aprender a vincular cada uno de los extraordinarios desarrollos científicos que se están llevando a cabo en nuestro país, con el progreso que queremos lograr.   Un aspecto central de este proceso ha sido la creación de una comunidad científica nacional, que destaque por su índice de impacto. María Teresa es una de las que han llevado la ciencia chilena a las más altas esferas. Pero además, yo diría, a las esferas más bajas, me refiero a que está haciendo un gran trabajo con los niños involucrándolos en la astronomía, por lo que podemos tener futuros astrónomos, ingenieros, científicos, etc. Gracias a María Teresa por eso también.   Hemos abierto nuevas áreas de investigación, con un gran potencial de expansión. En un par de años, la astronomía será la ciencia que requerirá la mayor capacidad de almacenamiento y análisis de datos en el país. En consecuencia, CORFO está explorando la viabilidad de convertir a Chile en actor clave de la "Big Data", basado en nuestra nueva capacidad instalada.   Pero tenemos que ir más rápido, ir más allá de fortalecer el trabajo que hemos hecho.   La astronomía debe ser un área de inspiración para todos los niños de Chile, así como un espacio que reúna a diversos actores y contribuya, de manera sistemática, al desarrollo de nuestras industrias.   Hay evidencia que ilustra la brecha que necesitamos cubrir: de toda la inversión en proyectos astronómicos en Chile, sólo el 20% lo realizan empresas nacionales. Por eso, el Ministerio de Economía busca promover nuestra industria nacional, creando espacios de colaboración en negocios tecnológicos relacionados con la astro-ingeniería o la astrofísica.   Pero en turismo, queremos diversificar la experiencia turística, como una estrategia para alcanzar los estándares internacionales. Antofagasta tiene el potencial para promover el turismo astronómico, a través de la convergencia de actores y eventos regionales, como el próximo Encuentro Latinoamericano de Astronomía, que se celebrará en 2019, aquí en Antofagasta.   En otras palabras, el país que imaginamos será menos distante y más tangible. El gigantesco espejo que se levantará de este lugar también nos permitirá vernos a nosotros mismos como una sociedad, como comunidad internacional, como humanidad.   Por todo ello, muchas gracias.