(Original Speech)    Dear Friends:   Well, I’m very pleased to welcome you to Chile and to this beautiful city on the Pacific, an ocean which has become an important scenario for dialogue, cooperation and trade.   This ocean, which as Pablo Neruda wrote, “gets out of control often”, offers us multiple opportunities to work in behalf of the well- being and the progress of our people; but it also presents us with many challenges.   This is why Chile, in the name of the Pacific Alliance, welcomes you here today: to talk and debate and to search, find and put in place ideas and strategies, which will ensure a better tomorrow for everyone in our countries.   We firmly believe that improving productivity, promoting knowledge sharing, and adding value to our goods and services, through scientific and technological advances, are all fundamental elements for achieving development.   The global state of affairs is a source of concern and calls for us to reflect upon our response. And this is a moment for a frank and constructive dialogue, a moment to evaluate what we are doing in terms of integration and trade openness, to jointly think about the possible ways to deal with the growing challenges.   Bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements are all valid alternatives for the members of the Pacific Alliance, as well as for our Asia Pacific partners. They are all powerful instruments for a competitive integration into the world trade of goods and services. They also ensure that there clear and stable rules to guide the work of all actors: public, private, national and foreign.   We also must face another challenge: to ensure that the benefits of open trade reach all our citizens.   Our objective is the construction of more inclusive and fair societies, where all are welcome. We believe that diversity offers us more opportunities and fewer threats.   The economies of the Pacific Alliance have faced low commodity prices, rising inequality, insecurity and some high profile corruption scandals.  In addition, there has been a rise in protectionist trade policies in some of our closest partners.    In this context, we must take advantage of each and every opportunity to improve productivity, promote investment, boost public-private partnerships and provide incentives for innovation.   The Alliance, which will celebrate its 6th anniversary next April, can and must set ambitious goals.  We have made progress in liberalizing trade in services, promoting investment and facilitating the movement of people.  Now we must negotiate agreements as a bloc with other integration schemes and/or individual countries.   This is the time to send forceful and innovative signs that will help build a stronger integration in the Pacific Rim.  At the same time, it is an opportunity for the Pacific Alliance to be a bridge for those countries on the Atlantic side of our region, to also participate in this common space, which we represent.   This, no more and no less, is the breadth of our challenges.    So, I invite you to raise your glasses: we wish for success in our endeavors, for our people and for a more prosperous, integrated and better future for the Asia Pacific.   Cheers.     (Traducción)   Viña del Mar, 14 de marzo de 2017   Queridos amigos:   Me complace darles la bienvenida a Chile y a esta hermosa ciudad del Pacífico, un océano que se ha convertido en un importante escenario para el diálogo, la cooperación y el comercio.   Este océano, que como escribió Pablo Neruda, "se sale de control a menudo", nos ofrece múltiples oportunidades para trabajar en pro del bienestar y el progreso de nuestros pueblos; pero que también nos presenta muchos desafíos.   Es por eso que Chile, en nombre de la Alianza del Pacífico, les da la bienvenida aquí hoy: para dialogar y debatir, buscar, encontrar y poner en marcha ideas y estrategias que aseguren un mejor mañana para todos en nuestros países.   Creemos firmemente que mejorar la productividad, promover el intercambio de conocimientos y agregar valor a nuestros bienes y servicios, a través de avances científicos y tecnológicos, son elementos fundamentales para lograr el desarrollo.   La situación mundial es motivo de preocupación y nos pide que reflexionemos sobre nuestra respuesta. Y éste es el momento para un diálogo franco y constructivo, el momento para evaluar lo que estamos haciendo en términos de integración y apertura comercial, para pensar conjuntamente sobre las posibles formas de hacer frente a los crecientes desafíos.   Los acuerdos bilaterales, regionales y multilaterales son alternativas válidas para los miembros de la Alianza del Pacífico, así como para nuestros socios del Asia Pacífico. Son poderosos instrumentos para una integración competitiva en el comercio mundial de bienes y servicios. También aseguran que existan reglas claras y estables para guiar el trabajo de todos los actores: público, privado, nacional y extranjero.   También debemos afrontar otro desafío: asegurar que los beneficios del comercio abierto alcancen a todos nuestros ciudadanos.  Nuestro objetivo es la construcción de sociedades más inclusivas y justas, donde todos sean bienvenidos. Creemos que la diversidad nos ofrece más oportunidades y menos amenazas.   Las economías de la Alianza del Pacífico han enfrentado los bajos precios de las materias primas, el aumento de la desigualdad, la inseguridad y algunos escándalos de corrupción de alto perfil. Además, ha habido un aumento de las políticas comerciales proteccionistas en algunos de nuestros socios más cercanos.   En este contexto, debemos aprovechar todas y cada una de las oportunidades para mejorar la productividad, promover la inversión, impulsar las asociaciones público-privadas y ofrecer incentivos para la innovación.   La Alianza, que celebrará su sexto aniversario el próximo mes de abril, puede y debe fijar metas ambiciosas. Hemos avanzado en la liberalización del comercio de servicios, fomentando la inversión y facilitando el movimiento de personas. Ahora debemos negociar acuerdos como bloque con otros esquemas de integración y/o países individuales.   Éste es el momento de enviar señales fuertes e innovadoras que ayudarán a construir una mayor integración en la Cuenca del Pacífico. Al mismo tiempo, es una oportunidad para que la Alianza del Pacífico sea un puente para los países del lado Atlántico de nuestra región, para participar también en este espacio común que representamos.  Esto, ni más ni menos, es la amplitud de nuestros desafíos.   Así que los invito a levantar sus copas: Deseamos que nuestros esfuerzos tengan éxito, por nuestra gente y por un mejor futuro, más próspero e integrado para el Asia Pacífico.   ¡Salud!