(Original Speech)     Dear Friends:   I would like to thank you very much, International Gender Champions for this honor, which motivates me to continue working for gender equality and women empowerment, a goal that I have promoted throughout my life, in different situations and posts.    I think it´s important for us to understand that the fight for equality can take place anywhere. Each one of us, in our daily environment, can and must place gender equality at the center, so that including women is not the exception but rather the norm, both natural and obvious.   This is why this initiative is so important.  There many features of our daily life that seems normal until we begin to analyze them. For example, until recently, no one questioned male only panels, seminars or roundtables. But once we begin to think about it, we immediately see that it is a clear, and one of most usual examples of gender bias.   Therein lies the value of this network of women and men –this is very important because usually when we discuss gender equality and women empowerment, it’s only the women net, but it’s about for convincing men, and on this, men can help us of course. We need everybody to go and that’s why UN Women has launched the Program He for She, so because we need everyone to involve in this work- who want to put an end to gender barriers. Diplomats, private and public authorities, members of international organizations, have made a formal pledge to neither participate nor organize male only panels. And I think that’s very important.      We hope that many others, worldwide, follow this example. It is not, as we well know, equality for the sake of equality. It is a reflection of a reality: male bastions are quickly disappearing. In the exact and social sciences, in the professional arena, in politics, economics and culture, there are women who think, contribute, dialogue, and claim their space in the public debate.   We know that increasing the presence of women in decision-making improves democracies, broadens the debate, redefines priorities and promotes a more peaceful co-existence.   We know that more women on boards of companies will improve the development and the performance, so we all already know, but why don’t we do all those things?   We are aware that more women in the workplace  results in a more positive working environment, creates new spaces for entrepreneurship and innovation, new business strategies and, why not, injects a more human touch in places that are usually cold and not very friendly to family life.   We know the key role that women play in peacebuilding, in reaching lasting agreements, in the integration of diversity and different points of view.   Therefore, it is an essential condition that any debate, discussion or meeting room includes a feminine viewpoint; otherwise that space lacks real representation. Half of the world's population is women. And this is a strange thing, because when you, we discuss a lot of, you know, resolutions of UN, we´re always speaking about the minorities, women and children. And the truth is that in Chile 52% of the population is women, but we don’t talk about men as minority, we talk about equal opportunities for men and woman. So, at least, half of them, the population, are women.  If we are not there, half of humanity is not present in that discussion, in that analysis, nor in the construction of proposals.   And tonight, because we are in the Play-offs for Football World Championship, Chile is playing with Venezuela, and I always say that if you only play with the half of the team, are we going to be able to win? No, so every country needs to hold team of men and women.    Gender equality is not only an imperative of justice and ethics; it is an essential condition for making progress toward balanced and equitable sustainable development.   I know that to be able to be successes on 2030 Agenda, we need men and women on board, doing what we did to do.   Increasing the visibility of inequality and the fight against discrimination, in all its forms, is something that we all, in every space of society, must understand.  But of course, those in higher positions have an even higher responsibility.   So, thank you so much for your commitment likes Global Gender Champions and I think what you’re doing is very important: it is practical, by one hand, but that’s why we can advance, not only with theory, not only with rhetoric, but with action.       Thank you so much.    (Traducción)     Amigas y amigos:   Quisiera agradecerles, International Gender Champions, por esta distinción, que me motiva a continuar trabajando por la igualdad de género y el empoderamiento de las mujeres, objetivo por lo que he luchado a lo largo de toda mi vida, en las diferentes posiciones y situaciones.   Creo que es importante para nosotros entender que la lucha por la igualdad puede darse en cualquier lugar. Cada uno de nosotros, en nuestro entorno diario, puede y debe situar la igualdad de género en el centro, de modo que incluir a las mujeres no es la excepción, sino la norma, natural y obvia.   Ésta es la razón por la cual esta iniciativa es tan importante. Hay muchas características de nuestra vida cotidiana que parecen normales hasta que comenzamos a analizarlas. Por ejemplo, hasta hace poco, nadie cuestionaba paneles, seminarios o mesas redondas sólo con hombres. Pero una vez que empezamos a pensar en ello, inmediatamente vemos que es un claro, y uno de los más habituales ejemplos de sesgo de género.   Ahí reside el valor de esta red de mujeres y hombres -esto es muy importante porque por lo general cuando hablamos de la igualdad de género y el empoderamiento de las mujeres, es sólo desde la red de las mujeres, pero se trata de convencer a los hombres, y sobre esto los hombres pueden ayudarnos por supuesto. Necesitamos que todos participen y es por eso que ONU Mujeres ha lanzado el Programa He for She, así que por eso necesitamos que todos se involucren en este trabajo- que quieren poner fin a las barreras de género. Diplomáticos, autoridades privadas y públicas, miembros de organizaciones internacionales, han hecho una promesa formal de no participar ni organizar paneles masculinos. Y creo que eso es importante.   Esperamos que muchos otros, en todo el mundo, sigan este ejemplo. No es, como bien sabemos, la igualdad en aras de la igualdad. Es un reflejo de una realidad: los bastiones masculinos están desapareciendo rápidamente. En las ciencias exactas y sociales, en el ámbito profesional, en la política, en la economía y en la cultura, hay mujeres que piensan, contribuyen, dialogan y reivindican su espacio en el debate público.   Sabemos que el aumento de la presencia de mujeres en la toma de decisiones mejora las democracias, amplía el debate, redefine las prioridades y promueve una coexistencia más pacífica.   Sabemos que más mujeres en las juntas directivas de las empresas mejorarán el desarrollo y el rendimiento, por lo que sí todos sabemos, pero, ¿por qué no hacemos todas esas cosas?   Somos conscientes de que un mayor número de mujeres en el lugar de trabajo resulta en un ambiente de trabajo más positivo, crea nuevos espacios para el emprendimiento y la innovación, nuevas estrategias empresariales y, por qué no, inyecta un toque más humano en lugares que suelen ser fríos y poco amistosos con la familia vida.   Conocemos el papel clave que desempeñan las mujeres en la consolidación de la paz, en la consecución de acuerdos duraderos, en la integración de la diversidad y en diferentes puntos de vista.   Por lo tanto, es una condición esencial que cualquier debate, discusión o sala de reuniones incluye un punto de vista femenino; de lo contrario el espacio carece de representación real. La mitad de la población mundial son mujeres. Y esto es extraño, porque cuando hablamos de muchas de las resoluciones de la ONU, siempre hablamos de las minorías, mujeres y niños. Y la verdad es que en Chile el 52% de la población son mujeres, pero no hablamos de hombres como minoría, hablamos de igualdad de oportunidades para hombres y mujeres. Por lo tanto, al menos, la mitad de ellos, la población, son mujeres. Si no estamos ahí, la mitad de la humanidad no está presente en esa discusión, en ese análisis, ni en la construcción de propuestas.   Y esta noche, ya que estamos en la Eliminatoria para el Campeonato Mundial de Fútbol, Chile juega con Venezuela, y siempre digo que si juegas sólo con la mitad del equipo, ¿vamos a poder ganar? No, por lo que cada país debe tener un equipo de hombres y mujeres.   La igualdad de género no es sólo un imperativo de justicia y ética; es una condición esencial para avanzar hacia un desarrollo sostenible equilibrado y equitativo.   Sé que para poder tener éxito en la Agenda 2030, necesitamos hombres y mujeres a bordo, haciendo lo que hicimos.   Aumentar la visibilidad de la desigualdad y la lucha contra la discriminación, en todas sus formas, es algo que todos debemos comprender en todos los espacios de la sociedad. Pero, por supuesto, aquellos en posiciones más altas, tienen una responsabilidad aún mayor.   Así que muchas gracias por su compromiso como Defensores Mundiales de Género, y creo que lo que están haciendo es muy importante: es práctico, por un lado, pero es la razón por la que podemos avanzar, no sólo con la teoría, no sólo con la retórica, sino con la acción.   Muchas gracias.