(Original Speech)    It is an honor to be here in Bridgetown today, in my first Official Visit to Barbados. Well, the truth it is my first visit to Barbados at all. Let me begin by expressing my solidarity to all those who suffered losses due to last week’s passage of tropical storm Harvey.   As Prime Minister has mentioned, we consider this visit a unique opportunity to strengthen our ties of friendship, to share views about the regional reality, and to continue the work we began together, within the Community of Caribbean countries, when we attended the CARICOM Summit in Georgetown, last year.   With Barbados we have built a long and strong relationship: Prime Minister has mentioned it will be 50 years, this year, of diplomatic relations, and those relations are strong because that is based upon our shared values of democracy, respect for human rights and the Rule of Law, and also views on international issues, where we agree on the need to strengthen the United Nations and inter-American systems, and address global and regional challenges in a concerted manner.   Latin America and the Caribbean are a priority for our foreign policy. As members of the community of American nations, we have a duty to cooperate and work together, as well as a commitment to deepen our political –of course–, economic, and cultural ties. I am certain that progressive integration and cooperation projects can make a difference, when we seek to achieve a prosperous and inclusive future for our nations.   And Primer Minister has mentioned many of the areas that we have worked already and many of one that once we have been discussing, so how we can expand them and make them works in terms of how such agreements will be a very important point to increase our trade and free flow of people, and tourism, of course.   I would like highlight the long-standing partnership with Barbados and CARICOM in the area of development cooperation.Since we began our cooperation programs in the Caribbean, many Barbados citizens have actively participated in Spanish language training, good governance and transparency, agricultural practices and disaster management and climate change adaptation projects.   Furthermore, our Cooperation Program 2015 – 2018 has an increased focus and budget on the Caribbean and we have new collaborative initiatives emphasizing the central themes of the Agenda 2030, such as disaster management, adaptation to climate change and Management of natural resources, among others.   As Prime Minister has mentioned, one of the areas that we analyzed as a very important area of common work is the relating oceans. We understand the importance for the Caribbean countries to consider Caribbean Sea and ocean as a special area, and we are discussing on the impact of climate change on oceans, on fishing, but also on the illegal fishing, and also on the consequences of plastics on shore too.   And we are committed to work together in terms of responding and having good programs to deal with this, it could be very worse in some danger for our countries.   Finally, let me to express my gratitude for the warm welcome Primer Minister, Freundel Stuart, and the people of Barbados have given us today. And we have identified many areas that we will continue working in terms of advancing on a trade agreements, advancing on agreements that permits to avoid double taxation among our countries and so on.   So we have had a very important visit it will make us work a lot more and we are certain that this visit marks a way to lead our relation on the future, so we can keep on working together in areas that are of interest for the both of us.   Thank you so much, Prime Minister, for this opportunity and we will continue working together to implement of the agreements and conversations that we have had in the meeting.     (Traducción)    Es un honor estar aquí hoy en Bridgetown, en mi primera Visita Oficial a Barbados. Bueno, en realidad es mi primera visita a Barbados. Permítanme empezar expresando mi solidaridad a todos aquellos que sufrieron pérdidas por el paso de la tormenta tropical Harvey, la semana pasada.   Como el Primer Ministro ha mencionado, consideramos esta visita una oportunidad única para fortalecer nuestros lazos de amistad, compartir puntos de vista sobre la realidad regional y continuar el trabajo que iniciamos juntos en la Comunidad de Países del Caribe, cuando asistimos a la Cumbre CARICOM, celebrada en Georgetown, el año pasado.   Hemos construido con Barbados una larga y fuerte relación: Como el Primer Ministro ha mencionado, este año serán 50 años de relaciones diplomáticas, y estas relaciones son fuertes porque están basadas en nuestros valores compartidos de democracia, respeto a los derechos humanos y el Estado de Derecho, y puntos de vista sobre cuestiones internacionales, en las que coincidimos en la necesidad de fortalecer las Naciones Unidas y los sistemas interamericanos, así como abordar los desafíos mundiales y regionales de manera concertada.   América Latina y el Caribe son una prioridad para nuestra política exterior. Como miembros de la comunidad de las naciones americanas, tenemos el deber de cooperar y trabajar juntos, así como un compromiso para profundizar nuestros lazos políticos, –por supuesto– económicos y culturales. Estoy segura de que los progresivos proyectos de integración y cooperación pueden marcar la diferencia cuando buscamos un futuro próspero e inclusivo para nuestras naciones.   Y el Primer Ministro ha mencionado muchas áreas en las que ya hemos trabajado y muchas otras que alguna vez hemos estado discutiendo, de manera que podamos expandirlas y hacer que funcionen, en términos de que tales acuerdos serán un punto muy importante para incrementar nuestro comercio y el libre flujo de personas, además del turismo, por supuesto.   Me gustaría destacar la asociación de larga data con Barbados y la CARICOM en el ámbito de la cooperación para el desarrollo. Desde que iniciamos nuestros programas de cooperación en el Caribe, muchos ciudadanos de Barbados han participado activamente en capacitación en español, buena gobernanza y transparencia, prácticas agrícolas y gestión de desastres, y proyectos de adaptación al cambio climático.   Además, nuestro Programa de Cooperación 2015-2018 tiene un mayor enfoque y presupuesto en el Caribe y tenemos nuevas iniciativas de colaboración enfatizando los temas centrales de la Agenda 2030, como manejo de desastres, adaptación al cambio climático y manejo de recursos naturales, entre otros.   Como el Primer Ministro ha mencionado, una de las áreas que analizamos como un área muy importante de trabajo común es la relacionada con los océanos. Entendemos la importancia que tienen para los países caribeños el océano y el Mar Caribe, como área especial, y discutimos sobre el impacto del cambio climático en los océanos, sobre la pesca, pero también en la pesca ilegal, además de las consecuencias de los desperdicios plásticos en las costas.   Y estamos comprometidos en trabajar juntos en términos de responder y tener buenos programas para abordar este problema, que podría empeorar en algún riesgo para nuestros países.   Por último, permítanme expresar mi gratitud por la cálida bienvenida que el Primer Ministro, Freundel Stuart, y el pueblo de Barbados nos ha dado hoy. Y hemos identificado muchas áreas en las que continuaremos trabajando, en términos de avanzar en los acuerdos comerciales, avanzar en los acuerdos que nos permitan evitar la doble tributación entre nuestros países, etc.     Así que hemos tenido una muy importante visita que nos hará trabajar mucho más, y estamos seguros de que esta visita marca una manera de dirigir nuestra relación con el futuro, para que podamos seguir trabajando juntos en áreas que son de interés para los dos.   Muchas gracias, Primer Ministro, por esta oportunidad y continuaremos trabajando juntos en implementar los acuerdos y conversaciones que hemos tenido en la reunión.