(Original Speech)      Dear Friends:   Well, I think today there is a lot of women, female heads of State and Government from different countries, along with UNITAID members and other strategic States, along some people from the civil society, joining our voices to lead an urgent call to action: to guarantee every woman, boy, girl and adolescent a healthy life and the promotion of their wellbeing.   It is a priority, both for its impact and benefits for all persons, and for its community relevance, that is, for the social, economic and political dimension that it possesses.   You know that the Global Strategy for Women's, Children's and Adolescents' Health aims to address health inequities, not only to prevent preventable deaths, but also to ensure that women, children and adolescents reach their full potential for development and is, in turn, become catalysts for change in their societies. It is not only about surviving but also about driving.   We are working with the High Steering Group Every Woman Every Child –that is co-chaired by me and Prime Minister of Ethiopia– mobilizing actors and resources to get us all into action. So, there is a lot of people from our countries, from private sectors, from NGO, from civil society organizations, that we are trying to promote action following the Global Strategy for Women's, Children's and Adolescents' Health.     So, if I may speak very briefly, we need to attack two fundamental issues with more determination and force. First, we need to increase investment and innovative approaches. And secondly, to achieve the implementation of each country´s strategy.   It is not only about increasing investment, it is important to increase investment but also about improving our use of the resources we have.   For this, the UNITAID experience is key. This has been the best overall response we have had as an innovative financing mechanism for access to treatments and medicines for those who need it most. It is an experience to be considered.   As a country, we were part of UNITAID from the beginning. We were among the founding countries and Chile was the first one to impose a tax or “solidarity tax” of $ 2 dollars on air flight tickets, which was then allocated to international cooperation programs. But afterwards, we have continued working on the commission of innovative financing looking for other ways of attracting money to the cooperation needs.   Each country needs to develop an integrated program, strengthening components such as early childhood development; the health and well-being of adolescents; improvement in quality, equity and dignity in health services; sexual and reproductive rights; women, girls and communities empowerment; and solutions to humanitarian crises or situations of greater fragility.   Well, one thing that we have is the responsibility not only to be in a meeting but also afterwards to take action. So that’s way last July, following that path, in Santiago, we hosted the High Level Meeting Every Woman Every Child, which produced a roadmap for Latin American and Caribbean countries that will help them in the design of national plans that promote innovative intersectoral action to end preventable deaths and achieve the full potential of women, children and teenagers.   Chile is fully committed to this SDG at regional and global levels, and the local level, as well. For more than a decade, we have developed an innovative and pioneering strategy, which is being replicated today in many other countries, that looks for care, assistance and protection for children.   It is called Chile Crece Contigo, that means “Chile Grows with you”, it is a double thing, I mean if you grow well, Chile will grow even economically, and you will be growing in an adequate way. That program installs the multisectoral logic in the implementation of policies and programs directed to early childhood, starting with the benefits of the health system.   Since 2005 we have ensured universal access to the most frequent health problems of Chileans.   We have made an effort to implement innovative mechanisms that reach directly to those who need more attention, and we are guaranteeing free access to medicines for those suffering from chronic diseases and their high costs in treatments. And it doesn’t means that is perfect, we still have a lot of challenges in terms of health, but we have been improving much more.   Dear Friends:   No country is self-sufficient in ensuring the well-being of its citizens. Today more than ever we need the joint work of governments, international agencies, civil society and communities. We must understand the urgency of the task, how essential it is to secure specific resources and policies to take charge of the health care and well-being of children, adolescents and women.   I think we have a lot to share among our countries and we have successful stories, we can learn a lot about the UNITAID experience, so the important thing is urgent, we need to make a call for action, we need, I was talking yesterday in other meeting to do a list, to do a list, you know, and the last message is that it can be done.   Thank you very much.        (Traducción)     Queridos amigos:   Bien, creo que hoy hay muchas mujeres jefas de Estado y de Gobierno de diferentes países, junto a los miembros de UNITAID y otros Estados estratégicos, junto a algunas personas de la sociedad civil, que unimos nuestra voz para liderar un llamado urgente a la acción: garantizar a toda mujer, niño y adolescente una vida saludable, promoviendo su bienestar.   Es una prioridad tanto por su impacto y beneficios en cada una de las personas, como por su relevancia comunitaria, es decir, por la dimensión social, económica y política que posee.   Ustedes saben que la Estrategia Mundial para la Salud de la Mujer, la Infancia y el Adolescente tiene como objetivo abordar las desigualdades en salud, no sólo para evitar muertes evitables, sino también para que las mujeres, los niños y los adolescentes alcancen su pleno potencial de desarrollo y se conviertan en catalizadores del cambio en sus sociedades. No se trata, entonces, sólo de sobrevivir sino de tomar el control de la situación.      Estamos trabajando con el Grupo De Alta Dirección Every Woman Every Child –copresidido por mí y el Primer Ministro de Etiopía–movilizando actores y recursos para ponernos todos en acción. Entonces, hay mucha gente de nuestros países, de los sectores privados, de las ONG, de las organizaciones de la sociedad civil, que estamos promoviendo acciones en pos de la Estrategia Mundial para la Salud de la Mujer, la Infancia y el Adolescente.   Entonces, si se me permite decirlo en corto, necesitamos atacar con más decisión y fuerza dos cuestiones fundamentales. En primer lugar, incrementar la inversión y las aproximaciones innovadoras. Y, en segundo lugar, alcanzar la aplicación de las diferentes estrategias a nivel de cada país.   Se trata no sólo de aumentar las inversiones, es importante incrementar la inversión pero también mejorar el uso que hacemos de los recursos con los que disponemos.   Para esto la experiencia de UNITAID es clave. Ésta ha sido la mejor respuesta global que hemos tenido como mecanismo de financiamiento innovador para el acceso a tratamientos y medicamentos para quienes más lo necesitan. Es una experiencia que no podemos desaprovechar.   Como país, formamos parte de UNITAID desde el comienzo. Estuvimos entre los países fundadores y Chile fue el primero en imponer un impuesto o "impuesto de solidaridad" de $2 dólares en boletos de avión, que luego fue asignado a programas de cooperación internacional. Pero después, hemos continuado trabajando en la comisión de financiamiento innovador, en busca de otras formas de atraer dinero a las necesidades de cooperación.   Cada país requiere desarrollar un programa integrado, fortaleciendo componentes como el desarrollo de la primera infancia; la salud y el bienestar de los adolescentes; la mejora en la calidad, equidad y dignidad en los servicios de salud; los derechos sexuales y reproductivos; el empoderamiento de mujeres, niñas y comunidades; y soluciones a las crisis humanitarias o situaciones de mayor fragilidad.   Bien, una de las cosas que tenemos es la responsabilidad no sólo de estar en las reuniones, sino también, luego de ello, tomar medidas. Es por eso que en julio, en esa línea, en Santiago, convocamos a la Reunión de Alto Nivel de Every Woman Every Child, poniendo a disposición de los países de América Latina y El Caribe una hoja de ruta que permita la elaboración de planes nacionales que promuevan la acción intersectorial innovadora para poner fin a las muertes evitables y lograr desplegar todo el potencial de las mujeres, niños y adolescentes.   Chile está plenamente comprometido con este ODS a nivel regional y global, pero también a nivel local. Venimos desarrollando, desde hace más de una década, una estrategia innovadora, que ha sido pionera y que hoy se está reproduciendo en varios países, que busca el cuidado, atención y protección a los niños y niñas.   Se llama “Chile Crece Contigo”, y tiene un doble significado, me refiero a que si usted crece bien, Chile crecerá, incluso en términos económicos, y que usted crecerá de una forma adecuada. Ese programa instala la lógica multisectorial en la implementación de políticas y programas dirigidos a la primera infancia, teniendo como puerta de entrada las prestaciones del sistema de salud.   Desde 2005 hemos asegurado el acceso universal a los problemas de salud más frecuentes de los chilenos y chilenas.     Hemos hecho un esfuerzo por implementar mecanismos innovadores para llegar directamente a quienes más necesitan atención, y estamos garantizando el acceso gratuito a medicamentos para quienes sufren de enfermedades crónicas y sus altos costos de tratamiento. Sin embargo, eso no significa que sea perfecto, todavía tenemos muchos desafíos en términos de salud, pero hemos estado mejorando mucho más.      Queridos amigos: Ningún país se basta a sí mismo para asegurar el bienestar de sus ciudadanos. Hoy más que nunca necesitamos del trabajo conjunto de los gobiernos, los organismos internacionales, la sociedad civil y de las comunidades. Debemos dimensionar la urgencia de la tarea, lo esencial que es disponer de recursos y políticas específicas para hacernos cargo de la salud y el bienestar, especialmente de niños, adolescentes y mujeres.   Creo que tenemos mucho que compartir entre nuestros países y tenemos historias exitosas, podemos aprender mucho sobre las experiencias de UNITAID. Así que lo importante es que es urgente, que necesitamos hacer un llamado a la acción, que necesitamos –estaba hablando ayer en otra reunión de hacer una lista– hacer una lista, ustedes saben, y el último mensaje es que se puede hacer.   Muchas gracias.