(Original Version)    Dear Friends:   I would like to thank you all for being here today. I am sure that this enthusiasm is a sign of the success of this event and the opportunities that will come afterwards.   Let me tell you just a personal bon mot: my family immigrated to Chile in the middle of the 1800s and that was XIX Century, and they were winemakers in France. So they went to Chile to produce there, they brought some varieties of wine, and they produced that it came from Chassagne-Montrachet that is Bourgogne. So for me, personally, it´s very fantastic to be here today.       And we said that this is a celebration: we celebrate the generosity of our land that has allowed Chile to associate its name worldwide with great quality wines.   We also celebrate the tireless spirit of thousands of men and women who dedicate their daily effort and work to the wine industry, giving Chile and the world one of the flagship products of our nation.   And this is a story that we have been able to consolidate with patience and hard work, boosting the unique characteristics of our valleys and the business abilities of our wine makers with a decided and permanent institutional support.   Because we know that in every shipment of wine we are sending not only an outstanding product; we are allowing the world to know what we are: a country that is not afraid to assume new challenges.   For example, we are making innovation a reality, by introducing new varieties. In 2016, the shipments of Cabernet Sauvignon, Sauvignon Blanc, Chardonnay, Riesling, Pinot Blanc, Merlot, Pinot Noir, Syrah, Malbec, and Carmenère, our signature grape, stood out.  There was also an increase in the sales of organic wines.   This increment has made our wine exports to reach over 1.8 billion dollars last year, three times the total value of our wine exports in 2003.   Today, 27 Chilean wineries will present to you a clear exhibition of the variety and dynamism of our industry.   But we are not only celebrating our wine. We are also recognizing a strong bond between two friend countries. We are pleased to be in China intensifying our relations, which are long standing with multiple expressions of friendship and a shared point of view.   Among these, is our trade agreement, which has been extremely beneficial for both of our countries. Today, we are fully engaged in the upgrading of that agreement, in order to create more opportunities and development.   In the same spirit, we look forward to keep developing commercial relationships that benefit both parties. That is exactly what this event is intended for: to generate contacts between our wine exporters and potential clients from various cities in this great country, that may carry the great taste of Chilean wine to more supermarkets, more restaurants and more houses all around China.   China has already established itself as the main market for Chilean wines, due to an increase in the volume and variety of our wines. As a matter of fact, in 2003, the wine shipments to China totaled 13 million dollars, while, in 2016 we exported bottles worth 195 million dollars, according to Wines of Chile. You will understand why, when you taste some of our wines today in the Wine Roadshow ASIA 2017.   The Roadshow we are inaugurating today includes the visit of representatives of Chilean vineyards to Xia Men, Hang Zhou, Nan Jing and Da Lian. And during these visits, we will hold seminars focused on trade and distribution, as well as a trade show, where the participant vineyards will be able to display their wines to potential clients. Finally, Business to Business or B2B meetings will take place. So I know you do not want to listen to me anymore, you just want to taste some wine, that’s why I will make it short.   So dear friends, we invite you to be part of a most enjoyable experience: to taste our wines, learn about them and hopefully make deals so you will enjoy them over and over again.   So it looks like I have to ask you for a toast. It’s a little early…ah, son las 12 horas de la noche allá… I have a friend who says you can always drink wine after 11 o’clock in the morning, and after she would say in some parts of the world, it’s always after 11 o’clock in the morning.   So we have to give all of them, some possibilities to taste. OK I will just make a toast for the success of this experience and hopefully you enjoy our wines and know a little more about our country.   Cheers!     (Traducción)     Queridos amigos:   Quisiera agradecer a todos por estar aquí hoy. Estoy segura de que este entusiasmo es un signo del éxito de este evento y de las oportunidades que vendrán después.   Permítanme que les señale un comentario personal: mi familia emigró a Chile a mediados de los años 1800s, que era siglo XIX, y eran productores de vino en Francia. Así que cuando fueron a Chile para producir allí, trajeron algunas variedades de vino; y produjeron la que venía de Chassagne-Montrachet, que es Bourgogne. Así que para mí, personalmente, es realmente fantástico estar aquí hoy.   Y decíamos que ésta es una celebración: celebramos la generosidad de nuestra tierra, que ha permitido a Chile asociar su nombre en todo el mundo con vinos de gran calidad.   También celebramos el espíritu incansable de miles de hombres y mujeres que dedican su esfuerzo y trabajo diario a la industria vinícola, dándole a Chile y al mundo uno de los productos insigne de nuestra nación.   Y ésta es una historia que hemos podido consolidar con paciencia y arduo trabajo, potenciando las características únicas de nuestros valles y las habilidades empresariales de nuestros viticultores con un decidido y permanente apoyo institucional.   Porque sabemos que en cada envío de vino estamos enviando no sólo un producto excepcional; estamos permitiendo que el mundo sepa lo que somos: un país que no tiene miedo de asumir nuevos retos.   Por ejemplo, estamos haciendo de la innovación una realidad, introduciendo nuevas variedades. En 2016 se destacaron los envíos de Cabernet Sauvignon, Sauvignon Blanc, Chardonnay, Riesling, Pinot Blanc, Merlot, Pinot Noir, Syrah, Malbec y Carmenère. También hubo un aumento en las ventas de vinos orgánicos.   Este incremento ha hecho que nuestras exportaciones de vino alcancen más de 1,8 mil millones de dólares el año pasado, tres veces el valor total de nuestras exportaciones de vino en 2003.   Hoy, 27 bodegas chilenas les presentarán una muestra clara de la variedad y dinamismo de nuestra industria.   Pero no sólo estamos celebrando nuestro vino. También estamos reconociendo un fuerte vínculo entre dos países amigos. Nos complace estar en China intensificando nuestras relaciones, que son de larga data con múltiples expresiones de amistad y un punto de vista compartido.   Entre ellos, está nuestro acuerdo comercial, que ha sido muy beneficioso para ambos países. Hoy en día, estamos totalmente comprometidos en la mejora de ese acuerdo, con el fin de crear más oportunidades y desarrollo.   En el mismo espíritu, esperamos seguir desarrollando relaciones comerciales que beneficien a ambas partes. Eso es exactamente lo que este evento pretende: generar contactos entre nuestros exportadores de vino y clientes potenciales de varias ciudades de este gran país, que pueden llevar el gran sabor del vino chileno a más supermercados, más restaurantes y más casas alrededor de China.   China ya se ha establecido como el principal mercado de los vinos chilenos, debido al aumento en el volumen y la variedad de nuestros vinos. De hecho, en 2003, los envíos de vino a China totalizaron 13 millones de dólares, mientras que en 2016 exportamos botellas por valor de 195 millones de dólares, según Vinos de Chile. Ustedes comprenderán el por qué, cuando degusten algunos de nuestros vinos hoy en la Wine Roadshow ASIA 2017.   El Roadshow que inauguramos hoy incluye la visita de representantes de los viñedos chilenos a Xia Men, Hang Zhou, Nan Jing y Da Lian. Y durante estas visitas, realizaremos seminarios centrados en el comercio y la distribución, así como una feria, donde los viñedos participantes podrán mostrar sus vinos a clientes potenciales. Por último, se llevarán a cabo Business to Business meetings o Reuniones B2B. Así que sé que ustedes ya no quieren seguir escuchándome, sólo quieren probar un poco del vino, ésa es la razón por la que lo haré breve.     Así que parece que tengo que pedirles que hagamos un brindis. Es un poquito temprano, ah, son las 12 de la noche allá… Ah tengo una amiga que dice que siempre puedes beber vino después de las 11 de la mañana, y después ella diría en algunas partes del mundo, siempre es después de las 11 de la mañana.   Tenemos que darles a probar de todos ellos, la posibilidad de probar. Bueno, sólo brindaré por el éxito de esta experiencia y tengo la esperanza de que disfruten nuestros vinos y conozcan un poco más de nuestro país.   ¡Salud!