(Original Version)    Dear friends:   Welcome to La Moneda. As you probably know this is the place where history has been made, through good times and bad times in our history. But it also the most important that we’ve been where, I would say, we could look forward the future with optimism.     Because within these walls, it can be found the hopes and dreams of millions which to be heard in the process of building our future. Men and women that make the voices heard and who trust the leaders to be mindful of the aspirations and to fight for a better tomorrow with great quality of life and wellbeing for all.    What does it mean?   It means that they wish for an education system that provides equal opportunities to all; for a work to be a place of self-achievement and prosperity; to an access to timely and decent health care; to be able to live in safe living and also working environment and conditions; and to ensure the voices will count as wells the fears and hopes be considered when we define how to organize our society and how we can better live together in the future.       So this is debate that in some way you’ve come here, and you’re providing with your experiences, with your visions, with your perspectives, a great –if I would say- expectations on our people.  Because we want the future, that is of course, with a great expectations and not just the sum of uncertainties or personal wishes. But though I have to say that current world is really full of uncertainties, it’s a very volatile world right now.     So you’ve also come here to provide the perspective of science, humanist thoughts, artistic imagination, technological creations, a view that place us at the new frontier of knowledge human activity.   And Chile thanks you.   We’re grateful to all of you have come to contribute to our National reflection and dialogue, by sharing your visions and experiences, and passion for knowledge.   Thanks to all of you have come to enrich the Outlook of this sixth Congress of the Future, encouraging through a clear language and education perspective to facilitate a great presence of science and technology in our conversations.       In an era dominated by an over-abundance of information may seems like a paradox that we need to make more effort in that sense, but I have no doubt that this is justified.   Firstly, because the light that science and technology provides is far from being available to all in our country; in other words, we hope our citizens can use science and technological incredible progress to have a better understanding of the World and the country, but also on the particularly future challenges and opportunities.   We need to develop a better dialogue between science, technology and civil Society, to go beyond the consumption and amazement that new creations can inspire.      And secondly, because events like this leads to develop a common perspective. That’s a way to question reality, a method to add accuracy –I would say a real quality- that can became the foundations of a constructive and informed debate.        So I think this Congress has a lot of values, which it has grown and became a great event, one which you made a reality.   As government, we hope to continue helping future generations to play an active role in the advanced National but also global knowledge community, where collaborative work and shared values lead to development that it can move also towards human emancipation.      Even tough, Latin-Americans are well known for speaking too long, I will finish right now, but we have to finish in a good way, so I would like to make a toast, if you can get a glass and if you all have at hand your glasses.   I would like to make a toast for the success of this Congress, for each and every of you and for a kind and warm life future.      Thanks you so much.    (Traducción)  Queridos amigos:   Bienvenidos a La Moneda. Probablemente, ustedes saben que éste es el lugar marcado por la historia, a través de buenos tiempos y malos períodos en nuestra historia. Pero, sobre todo, yo diría que hemos estado donde podemos mirar con optimismo nuestro futuro.   Porque en estos muros están representados los sueños y esperanzas de millones de personas, que piden ser escuchadas para participar en la construcción de nuestro futuro. Hombres y mujeres que hacen que sus voces se escuchen, y que confían en que los gobernantes estemos conscientes de sus anhelos y que luchemos por alcanzar un mejor mañana con una gran calidad de vida y bienestar para todos.   ¿Qué significa esto?   Que quieren un sistema educativo que provea oportunidades equitativas para todos; que quieren que el trabajo sea un espacio de realización y prosperidad; que quieren acceso a una atención de salud digna y oportuna; que quieren vivir seguros y trabajar en buenas condiciones ambientales laborales; que se aseguren que se tomarán en cuenta las voces así como se consideren sus temores y esperanzas cuando definimos cómo organizamos nuestra sociedad y cómo podemos vivir mejor juntos en el futuro.   Así que éste es el debate al que ustedes, de alguna forma, se han venido a sumar, aportando con sus experiencias, con sus puntos de vistas, con sus perspectivas, grandes –si se me permite decirlo- expectativas en nuestra gente. Porque queremos un futuro – desde luego- con grandes expectativas, y no sólo la suma de incertidumbres o cálculos individuales. Aunque tengo que decir que el mundo actual está en verdad lleno de incertidumbres, es un mundo volátil el de ahora.   Por eso que ustedes también han venido a aportar la mirada de la ciencia, de la reflexión humanista, de la imaginación artística, de la creación tecnológica, una mirada que nos pone en las fronteras del saber humano.   Y Chile se los agradece.   Estamos muy agradecidos de todos ustedes que han venido a contribuir a nuestra reflexión y diálogo nacionales, compartiendo sus visiones y experiencias, su pasión por el saber.   Gracias a todos los que han venido a enriquecer la mirada de este VI Congreso del Futuro, fomentando el lenguaje claro y la perspectiva  educacional para facilitar una mayor presencia de la ciencia y la tecnología en nuestras conversaciones.   En una época dominada por la abundancia de información puede parecer paradojal que necesitemos esforzarnos en tal sentido, pero no me cabe duda que se justifica.   En primer lugar, porque la luz que aporta la ciencia y la tecnología está muy lejos de estar realmente disponible para todos en nuestro país; en otras palabras, tenemos la esperanza de que nuestros ciudadanos puedan usar el increíble progreso científico y tecnológico, para tener un mejor entendimiento del mundo y del país, pero también particularmente los desafíos futuros y las oportunidades.   Necesitamos desarrollar un mejor dialogo entre la ciencia, la tecnología y la sociedad civil, más allá del consumo y más allá del asombro que causan las nuevas creaciones.   En segundo lugar, porque eventos como éste llevan a desarrollar una mirada común. Es decir, una forma de interrogar la realidad, un método para agregar rigor –yo diría, de gran calidad– y que pueda convertirse en la base de un debate informado y constructivo.   Así que creo que este Congreso tiene mucho valor, que ha crecido y se ha consolidado, y al que ustedes han hecho una realidad.   Como gobierno esperamos seguir ayudando a que las próximas generaciones tengan un rol activo en la comunidad del conocimiento avanzado nacional pero también mundial, donde el trabajo colaborativo y los valores compartidos lleven a un desarrollo que siga llevando adelante la emancipación del ser humano.   Aunque los latinoamericanos son bien reconocidos por hablar demasiado tiempo, voy a terminar ahora, pero tenemos que terminar de buena manera, así que me gustaría hacer un brindis, si ustedes pueden alcanzar su copa y si todos tienen a la mano sus copas.  Quisiera hacer un brindis por el éxito de este Congreso, por cada uno de ustedes y por un futuro amable y acogedor de la vida.   Muchas gracias.